Last week, the Senate passed an amendment I authored that ends the conflict of interest in Wall Street’s credit rating agency system. This problem was a key reason for our economic collapse and fixing it will go a long way toward ensuring it never happens again. Credit rating agencies are supposed to be independent, non-biased companies that evaluate the risk of complex investments so that investors can make informed decisions. Unfortunately, in recent years, credit rating agencies have faced a conflict of interest between making money and maintaining their independence.

Right now, banks choose which credit rating agencies they will pay to rate the quality of their bonds and other financial products.  Now, you do not have to be Adam Smith to guess what happened in this system. The banks would take their financial products to all three agencies and when the credit rating agency did not give them the high rating they wanted, they would not hire that rating agency the next time. And the credit rating agencies responded in kind. They repeatedly overrated terrible securities. In fact, of all the subprime mortgage-backed securities issued in 2006 and 2007 that received a AAA rating – the highest possible rating – over 90 percent have been downgraded to junk status. This ratings shopping created a significant conflict of interest, and it was one of the main causes of the financial meltdown.

Putting a stop to this isn’t a conservative idea, a liberal idea, or even a moderate idea. It’s just common sense. And that’s why my amendment to fix the conflict of interest problem had broad support from both sides of the aisle. And that’s a rare thing these days.

My proposal creates a new clearinghouse, controlled by private investors (not the government), that assigns credit rating agencies to banks when the banks want a bond or financial product rated. This means that banks will no longer be able to shop around for a rating. And they will not be able to pressure a rating agency into giving a good score in exchange for future business.

Over time, the clearinghouse will monitor the ratings the agencies give out and refine its method of assignments. It will reward agencies that are more accurate and give fewer assignments to those that are less accurate. It will incentivize accuracy. And in doing so, it will also give smaller agencies a chance to compete.

This solution is direct and effective. The amendment passed with 11 Republican votes, and I am proud that it protects consumers and holds Wall Street accountable.
