Washington DC – U.S. Senator Amy Klobuchar announced today that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service will expedite removing the Great Lakes gray wolf from the Endangered Species Act list in Minnesota and western Great Lakes states. The announcement comes after Klobuchar called on Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar to expedite delisting of the western Great Lakes gray wolf in a letter sent earlier this week. The Department of Interior stated in a response letter today that the expedited process Klobuchar pushed for will result in the removal of the gray wolf by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service by the end of 2011.

“The gray wolf population has made a comeback in Minnesota and now it is threatening our local communities,” Klobuchar said.  “The decision to remove the gray wolf from the Endangered Species Act list will protect Minnesota families, farms and businesses, and our state’s hunting industry, and will help restore balance to our natural habitats.”

Similar efforts to delist other species on the Endangered Species Act list, such as the bald eagle, have resulted in the successful preservation of their populations.  Recent estimates indicate Minnesota’s wolf population is nearly 3,000 strong – nearly double the 1,600 minimum the Endangered Species Act requires to ensure long-term survival – and the increased numbers have the potential to threaten residents, livestock, and the state’s hunting industry, which contributes over $600 million a year to Minnesota’s economy.

 

The Minnesota Department of Natural Resources currently has a management plan ready to implement when USFWS delists the gray wolf from the Endangered Species Act.

Klobuchar also plans to introduce backup legislation to ensure that the delisting occurs. Klobuchar’s legislation aims to avoid legal delays that have so far prevented the delisting process of the gray wolf in Minnesota.

Klobuchar is a member of the Senate Agriculture Committee and in December 2009, she and U.S. Congressman Jim Oberstar wrote to U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Acting Director Rowan Gould requesting he take action to delist the gray wolf in Minnesota.
