Washington, D.C. – U.S. Senator Amy Klobuchar (D-Minn.) and U.S. Senator Scott Brown (R-Mass.) led a bipartisan letter, signed by 13 other senators, to the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) calling on the agency to reform and streamline the approval process for medical devices to maintain safety and encourage innovation. The senators focused on the 510(k) process and urged the FDA to enact reforms to the process that will protect patients without stifling new health care breakthroughs. Minnesota has over 400 medical device companies that employ tens of thousands of Minnesotans. In Massachusetts, there are more than 260 medical device companies that employ tens of thousands of Bay Staters and are an engine of growth and exports.

“Innovation and safety are vital to the success of the U.S. medical device industry,” Klobuchar said.  “Minnesota is a national leader in health care innovation and as the FDA begins to review reforms that will impact the medical device industry, it is critical that changes are made to allow our companies to continue to create jobs, develop innovative products, and maintain patient safety.” 

“Massachusetts medical device companies are on the forefront of medical innovation and provide high quality jobs and investment for our state,” said Senator Brown. “They need an economic environment that will allow them to thrive and create jobs, and that’s why it’s important we do not impose burdensome new rules and regulations that hurt their ability to compete and contribute to our economy.”

The FDA is currently reviewing comments received from the medical device industry, academic experts, and numerous health care providers and is planning to release a list of reforms it can make by the end of the year. The Institute of Medicine will release its recommendations on the 510(k) process next summer.

In the letter, the senators addressed proposed changes to the FDA 510(k) approval process that threaten to create more red tape and delays for small medical device firms as they develop new innovative products.

Klobuchar is the chair of the Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Competitiveness, Innovation, and Export Promotion, and she has met with FDA Commissioner Margaret Hamburg to discuss the medical device approval process. 

Senators Senator Al Franken (D-MN); Pat Roberts (R-KS); John Kerry (D-MA); Mike Johanns (R-NE); Kay Hagan (D-NC); Olympia Snowe (R-ME); Evan Bayh (D-IN); Kay Bailey Hutchinson (R-TX); Ben Nelson (D-NE); John Cornyn (R-TX); Debbie Stabenow (D-MI); Robert Casey (R-PA); John Barrasso (R-WY) also signed the letter.


Full text of the letter is below.

December 8, 2010

Dr. Margaret Hamburg
Commissioner
Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Avenue
Silver Spring, MD 20993-002

Dear Commissioner Hamburg:

We are writing with regard to the FDA’s recent proposals to reform the 510(k) process for reviewing medical technologies.  We share your goals of encouraging the development of new treatments and cures for patients while also assuring that medical products are safe and effective.  At the same time, we must ensure that reforms are reasonable and do not hinder innovation, unnecessarily delay patient access to new treatments, or undermine the U.S. medical technology industry’s continued global leadership.

Innovation in the U.S. medical technology industry is an American success story.  These companies lead the world with groundbreaking new technologies that improve patient care.  They are also a key force in the U.S. economy – providing good-paying jobs that support small towns and large communities, and remaining one of the few manufacturing sectors with a consistent positive balance of trade.  Additionally, many of these companies are small businesses that help drive innovation and economic growth.  

Recent studies have shown that for most products, the 510(k) process has an exemplary record of assuring safety.  Unfortunately, despite this positive record, recent FDA data show disturbing trends in the 510(k) process, which result in delays and frustration for manufacturers, providers, and patients alike.  Treatment of submissions is less predictable and consistent, and both total review time and the time manufacturers spend answering FDA questions about submitted applications have increased substantially. 

Most disturbing is that the slower pace of the U.S. regulatory process is causing manufacturers to more frequently introduce innovative new products in Europe first, delaying access by American patients to treatments and cures by months or even years.  Without a clear, predictable, and reasonable approval process in the U.S., we are concerned that these troubling trends will be exacerbated, putting U.S.-led innovation and jobs at risk. 

We are pleased that many of the FDA’s 510(k) recommendations will go a long way toward achieving a more predictable and consistent process that supports product innovation while also ensuring product safety.  Enhanced training, professional development, and knowledge-sharing among reviewers and managers, as well as additional guidance documents so industry knows what is expected, would greatly improve the quality and consistency of the process.  

However, we are concerned that many of the recommendations in the report could result in a more burdensome and time-consuming approval process that discourages the development of new treatments for patients.  There are many proposals that are highly controversial and lack significant detail – including limiting the use of predicates, expanding the FDA’s rescission authority, changing key definitions and terms, and mandatory pre-market inspections.  In addition, the sheer volume of changes have the potential to create confusion and significantly slow the product approval process to the detriment of innovation, and ultimately, to patients. 

Additionally, we would like to understand with some precision what the agency costs attendant to full implementation of the recommendations will be. This is necessary to inform both the budget and appropriations processes ahead, as well as the forthcoming device user fee program reauthorization.

Given the potential for enormous disruption in the innovation process, we believe FDA must proceed cautiously.  We believe FDA should focus first on non-controversial proposals, but before any proposed change to the 510(k) process is implemented, it is essential that FDA provide stakeholders ample notice and opportunity for comment.  In addition, we believe FDA must operate in a transparent fashion and provide greater detail on the specifics of each proposal before moving forward.  And FDA should carefully consider the impact of any proposed change on the ability of companies to innovate in a predictable and consistent regulatory environment so they can continue to bring medical advances to patients.

Thank you for your attention to this important matter and we look forward to your response.
