U.S. Senators Arlen Specter and Bob Casey today announced that the U.S. Senate Appropriations Committee has approved federal funding for several Pennsylvania projects. The projects are contained in the Fiscal Year 2011 Military Construction Appropriations Bill. 

Included in the bill is $7.63 million for construction of a Quiet Propulsion Load House at the Naval Support Activity, Mechanicsburg’s Philadelphia annex. This project will construct a state of the art Quiet Propulsion Load House facility which will provide a single location for reduced and full-scale research, development, testing and evaluation of electric propulsion system and components acoustic characterization and performance testing. This project leverages significant existing Navy electric power generation, distribution, and cooling infrastructure that would be cost prohibitive to replicate anywhere else. 

Also, included is $5.93 million for Security Improvements at the Naval Support Activity, Mechanicsburg. 

“I am pleased that my colleagues on the Appropriations Committee have recognized the valuable contribution these projects will make to our nation’s defense,” said Senator Specter. “The construction and renovation of facilities that support our active and reserve military forces will strengthen our economy and assist the brave men and women who serve our country.” 

“These projects are vital to Pennsylvania’s economic development and the overall security of the United States,” said Senator Casey. “I am pleased the Senate Appropriations Committee has approved this important funding to improve Pennsylvania’s military infrastructure, which is crucial for the support, training and security of our men and women serving in Pennsylvania and across the world.” 


The bill must be approved by the full Senate, the House of Representatives and signed into law by the President before funding is final. 


The following two additional projects were included in the President’s budget proposal to Congress and were funded by the Committee: 

 $96 million for construction at the Defense Distribution Depot in New Cumberland 

 $4.1 million to improve the Air National Guard’s 112th Air Operations Squadron’s facilities in State College.
