WASHINGTON, D.C. – U.S. Senators Barbara A. Mikulski and Benjamin L. Cardin (both D-Md.) today announced the Appalachian Regional Commission (ARC) has awarded $272,975 in grant funding to establish the Aviation Maintenance Technology School at Hagerstown Regional Airport in Hagerstown, Maryland. The school, to be administered by the Pittsburgh Institute of Aeronautics (PIA), will train a pool of local, skilled workers capable of serving the aircraft maintenance needs at the regional airport.
 
"The launch of the Aviation Maintenance Technology School means jobs, jobs, jobs right here in Western Maryland – jobs that are in demand today and jobs that will now be filled by local workers. The school will help train the workforce the Hagerstown Regional Airport needs to stay competitive," Senator Mikulski said. "The Hagerstown Regional Airport is critical to keeping Western Maryland's economy moving. I will continue to fight to keep Marylanders on the go and for a continued federal investment in our communities."
 
"Hagerstown Regional Airport is an important economic hub and federal investments like this help keep Maryland's workforce competitive even during tough economic times," said Senator Cardin. "I am proud that we are able to deliver resources that will help ensure that Western Maryland continues to be a magnet for quality businesses thanks to a growing pool of local, high-tech workers and state-of-the-art facilities."
 
The Aviation Maintenance Technology School will train students to receive Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) certifications as aircraft maintenance technicians, helping to meet the manpower needs at Hagerstown Regional Airport. This influx of skilled workers will fill high-paying aviation maintenance positions, boosting the local economy and allowing the airport to expand. The ARC is a federal-state partnership that works with the people of Appalachia to create opportunities for self-sustaining economic development and improved quality of life. In addition to ARC funding, local sources will provide a dollar-for-dollar match, bringing the total project cost to $545,950.
