WASHINGTON, D.C. – U.S. Senators Barbara A. Mikulski and Benjamin L. Cardin (both D-Md.) today announced the Senate's confirmation of Maryland Court of Special Appeals Judge Ellen Hollander and U.S. Magistrate Judge James Bredar to vacancies on the United States District Court for the District of Maryland, Northern Division, located in Baltimore, Maryland. 
 
Judge Hollander will occupy the seat formerly held by Judge Andre Davis, who was confirmed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in November 2009. Judge Bredar will fill the vacancy created by Judge J. Frederick Motz's notification of senior status last November.
 
"I was proud to recommend Judge Ellen Hollander and Judge James Bredar to President Obama and am so pleased that they have been confirmed by the Senate to serve as judges in the United States District Court for the District of Maryland," Senator Mikulski said. "Both Judge Hollander and Judge Bredar possess the qualities that are needed to make sure the rights of ordinary Americans are protected and have the experience that will allow them serve with an open mind and adhere to the rule of law."
 
"I was pleased to work with Senator Mikulski to recommend these nominations to the President last year. It has been refreshing to work with an administration open to finding quality, consensus candidates for such critical positions," said Senator Cardin, a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee.

Ellen Lipton Hollander currently serves as a Judge on the Maryland Court of Special Appeals, a position she has held since 1994.  She received her juris doctorate from Georgetown University Law Center, and upon graduation, served as a law clerk to the Honorable James R. Miller Jr. on the United States District Court for the District of Maryland.  She has spent her entire legal career in the State of Maryland, and has served as an Assistant United States Attorney and Circuit Court Judge in Baltimore City. 

"Judge Hollander has the experience to make her a top-notch District Court judge. She has served Maryland's State courts at both the trial and appellate levels for more than 20 years," Senator Mikulski said. "Before becoming a judge, she practiced law in both the public and private sectors, including as a federal prosecutor in Baltimore. In addition to her stellar professional qualifications, she has stayed in touch with her community, which I believe helps make her an excellent judge."

"Judge Hollander exemplifies the spirit of public service.  She is well known by lawyers and jurors alike in Maryland for her meticulous reasoning process and well-crafted legal opinions.  She really is a model of a fair and impartial judge who will dispense equal justice under the law," Senator Cardin said.  "I know that Judge Hollander will serve our nation and all Marylanders proudly."
 
James K. Bredar is a United States Magistrate Judge in the District of Maryland, and has served in this capacity since 1998.  He received his juris doctorate, with honors, from Georgetown University Law Center, and began his legal career in Colorado, where he served as an Assistant United States Attorney.  Judge Bredar then served as the Federal Public Defender for the District of Maryland from 1992-1998, before joining the bench as a magistrate judge.
 
"Judge Bredar is uniquely qualified for this important position on the District Court because he has served the justice system from both sides – as a defense attorney and as a prosecutor," Senator Mikulski said. "As the Federal Public Defender for Maryland, he revitalized and expanded the office in Baltimore while still taking time to give back to his community by serving as a Sunday school teacher and as a volunteer in his children's school. He is an advocate for keeping the courthouse door open to everyone."
 
"Judge Bredar is genuinely concerned about broadening the access to justice of Americans to their courts.  He believes that we can do better with both our criminal and civil justice systems.  Judge Bredar brings to his new position a wide range of courtroom and litigation experience, including important work as a mediator in our federal court's alternative dispute resolution program," said Senator Cardin. "The people of Maryland will be well served by having Judge Bredar on the federal bench in Baltimore."
