WASHINGTON, D.C. – Commerce, Justice, Science (CJS) Appropriations Subcommittee Chairwoman Barbara A. Mikulski (D-Md.) announced that the Omnibus Appropriations Act filed today provides $363 million to protect our nation’s children from predators and $29.9 billion for the Department of Justice (DOJ) to help fight violent crime and terrorism and protect communities and families.
“Nothing is more important to Americans than the safety of their children,” Senator Mikulski said. “This bill gives law enforcement agents the funding they requested – and the resources they need – to keep child predators at bay and to stay one step ahead of these sinister criminals.”
Chairwoman Mikulski has fought for increased funding to ensure that justice programs give federal, state and local law enforcement the tools to prevent, investigate and prosecute crimes against children, including:
$40 million to expand federal, state and local law enforcement efforts to protect our nation’s most vulnerable by locating missing children, and targeting and prosecuting predatory child molesters and those who traffic in child pornography.
$60 million to hire and train state and local law enforcement to track down and arrest child predators who stalk children on the Internet.
$53 million for the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s (FBI) Innocent Images program, located in Calverton, Maryland, to catch deviants who use the Internet to prey on children.
$26.1 million for the FBI’s Innocence Lost program to rescue children forced into prostitution and sex trafficking.
$24 million for local law enforcement predator units to track, detect, apprehend and prosecute sex offenders who victimize children.
$61 million for the U.S. Marshals Service, which includes a $10 million increase to hire and train 50 new Deputy U.S. Marshals to track down and arrest fugitive sex offenders.
$15 million for grants to school districts to keep kids safe at school with officers and equipment.
$25 million for counseling, witness protection and relocation for victims of trafficking.
$38.5 million have assistant U.S. Attorneys prosecute sex offenders. 
