WASHINGTON, D.C. – Commerce, Justice, Science (CJS) Appropriations Subcommittee Chairwoman Barbara A. Mikulski (D-Md.) announced that the Omnibus Appropriations Act filed today provides a historic level of funding for the Department of Justice’s (DOJ) Office on Violence Against Women and other programs authorized by the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA).
“This funding to combat domestic abuse, dating violence and sexual assault will protect women, families and our communities, and help rebuild lives,” said Chairwoman Mikulski, who helped pass VAWA into law. “No woman in this country should live in fear that her husband or boyfriend will hurt or kill her or her kids. I have absolutely no tolerance for domestic violence. That’s why I strongly support legislation and grant programs that help protect women and their families from continued violence and abuse, particularly during economically distressed times – when, unfortunately, abuse is more common.”
The act includes $448.5 million for the DOJ’s office of Violence Against Women. Four additional VAWA programs administered by the Office of Justice Programs were funded at the same level as fiscal year 2010, bringing the total funding in fiscal year 2011 for VAWA programs to a record $472.5 million, a $28 million increase over last year.
Domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault and stalking are crimes of epidemic proportions, exacting terrible costs on lives and our communities. A quarter of U.S. women report that they have been physically assaulted by an intimate partner during their lifetimes, and 1 in 6 women and 1 in 33 men have been the victims of attempted or completed rape. The cost of domestic violence exceeds $5.8 billion each year.
The CJS spending bill funds multiple competitive grant programs to keep victims safe and hold perpetrators accountable by supporting training for police officers and prosecutors; state domestic violence and sexual assault coalitions; rape prevention programs; national domestic violence hotlines; battered women’s shelters and transitional housing support services; help for teens and young adults caught in abusive relationships; victims of child abuse; and funding for counselors of rape victims during trials.
