WASHINGTON, D.C. – Commerce, Justice, Science (CJS) Appropriations Subcommittee Chairwoman Barbara A. Mikulski (D-Md.) announced that the Omnibus Appropriations Act filed today provides stronger cyber security for America, bridges the divide between the private and public sectors and helps train the cyber warriors of tomorrow to make the country safer and the economy stronger.
“The United States government needs the resources and people to defend itself from cyber attacks,” Chairwoman Mikulski said. “Yet it’s not enough just to defend dot-mil and dot-gov. The government needs to work with the private sector to protect dot-com, the backbone of the innovation economy. The private sector is a source of technological innovation and ingenuity and of jobs, and a public-private collaboration will help tackle emerging challenges that impact not just the government but the economy as a whole.”
“Investments in cyber security don’t just protect big companies or the government – they protect our privacy and personal financial information,” Senator Mikulski said. “Right now, Maryland serves as the national hub for keeping the United States and its citizens safe online. Investments in the Omnibus Act will build our national capacity and our local workforce.”
The Omnibus Appropriations Act funds multiple cyber security initiatives, including the expansion of National Science Foundation student grants to create career tracks in cyber security, the addition of 163 new cyber positions at the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and the creation of a National Cyber Security Center of Excellence (NCCOE).
The NCCOE will be at the U.S. Department of Commerce’s National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), headquartered in Gaithersburg, Maryland. The Act provides $10 million for the NCCOE in addition to NIST’s ongoing research on emerging cyber security technologies and threats.
“The NCCOE is going to create a hub of innovation and development, a gateway for the private sector to forge partnerships to adopt mutually beneficial research, cyber technology tools and other important things,” Senator Mikulski said.
The bill also includes:
$182 million for the FBI to fund 723 positions in cyber security. Those positions will augment and strengthen the Bureau’s growing capabilities to detect, disrupt and dismantle organized cyber criminals operating in the United States and overseas.
$144.6 million for cyber security research at the National Science Foundation, $55 million of which is NSF’s contribution to the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative. NSF provides 82 percent of the total federal support for basic computer science research at colleges and universities.
$45 million for NSF’s Federal Cyber Service: Scholarships for Service program, tripling the support for undergraduate and graduate students to gain the skills needed to enter the federal government’s cyber security workforce.
Senator Mikulski said these efforts are critical, “to make sure that in the world of cyber warfare, America continues to lead the way – and that we do it in a way to make sure we have a more secure country in both its public and private domains. And at the same time, use it as an opportunity to build a stronger economy where we are able to compete among ourselves and in the global market.”
