December 15, 2010 – Today, Nebraska’s Senator Ben Nelson made these comments about upcoming action in the U.S. Senate on legislation to fund the government for fiscal year 2011. The U.S. House has passed a one-year continuing resolution. The Senate is expected to first consider the Fiscal Year 2011 Consolidated Appropriations Act, or omnibus bill, then possibly the continuing resolution. The difference in spending is 1.2 percent.
“Within the next few days we’ll vote legislation to fund the government,” said Senator Nelson. “I plan to vote for the omnibus spending plan because it will support and grow Nebraska jobs. If the Senate votes on a continuing resolution I’ll vote no.
“A continuing resolution cuts spending for Nebraska jobs-- let me repeat, cuts spending that supports jobs--at Offutt Air Force Base, STRATCOM, the VA Medical Center, and the promising Innovation Campus in Lincoln, while other federal spending is put on autopilot. The continuing resolution sends important Nebraska priorities off course toward an uncertain future,” Nelson said.
“I can’t imagine why anyone would want to stall a new Omaha VA hospital when the existing facility has woefully inadequate to meet the medical needs of veterans.
“I can’t imagine why anyone would want to delay modernizing STRATCOM, the command center for America’s strategic nuclear and cyber defenses.
“I can’t imagine why anyone would want to put off developing a research center turning Nebraska’s great resources into economic development products.
“In addition to these concerns, the continuing resolution actually increases rather than cuts spending on Congress and its related agencies.
“I’m chairman of the Legislative Branch Appropriations Subcommittee and we worked hard this year live with less. We passed a bipartisan bill that spends less on Congress and related agencies next year compared to this year. We cut spending.
“But the continuing resolution actually spends more and I simply can’t go along to get along with that Washington plan.
“Finally,” Nelson said, “it’s also important to remember that the fiscal year started more than two months ago, on October 1. So, while we have been working to take major tax hikes off autopilot that are set to kick in January 1, we are behind in addressing funding, whether it’s for our troops, for homeland security or for the people who run programs that provide jobs and services across our country.
“It’s time for Congress to provide some stability and certainty when it comes to both taxing and funding.”
The Continuing Resolution proposes spending $1.09 trillion for fiscal year 2011. The omnibus bill proposes spending $1.108 trillion. The difference between the bills is 1.2 percent.
