WASHINGTON — The Securities and Exchange Commission has stopped hiring and halted most travel by agency officials. Hundreds of millions of dollars in aid to nations like Pakistan is held up, as are American contributions to global health and emergency food programs.
A systems upgrade by the Internal Revenue Service to improve electronic data-keeping and speed tax refunds could be delayed for years — all because the federal government is operating on a temporary measure largely at last year’s levels.
Congress on Tuesday approved yet another temporary spending bill, this one running through March 4, the fourth such stopgap measure since the fiscal year ended Sept. 30.
The effective spending freeze amounts to a reduction when rising costs are taken into account — a welcome outcome to many Republicans — and disrupts the government’s ability to carry out programs and policy changes. And with the partisan feud over spending threatening to become an all-out impasse when the Republican majority takes control of the House in January, such temporary spending measures, and the crunch they cause, may continue indefinitely.
Republicans say Democrats are to blame, having failed to pass any of the dozen regular appropriations bills earlier this year. Democrats say Republicans are stalling until next year, when they will have greater leverage in Congress to press for cuts at levels that Democrats call reckless and unrealistic.
But the finger-pointing is largely irrelevant to dozens of budget-constrained federal agencies, as well as to state and local governments and a wide array of local organizations that depend heavily on year-to-year financing approved by Congress.
Agencies have some ability to move money among programs to deal with changing priorities, but they say it is not enough to ensure that they can meet all their responsibilities.
“Operating under the continuing resolution is already forcing the agency to delay or cut back enforcement and market oversight efforts,” said John Nester, a spokesman for the S.E.C., which faces a huge new workload to carry out the Wall Street regulation law enacted this year. “The longer we operate under significant budgetary restrictions, the greater the impact.”
In Congress, the spending fight is likely to be further complicated by the need to raise the federal debt ceiling, perhaps as soon as early February, to prevent the Treasury from defaulting on its obligations.
Many new Republican lawmakers, especially those supported by Tea Party groups, are likely to resist voting for an increase, unless it is accompanied by severe spending cuts. The incoming House speaker, Representative John A. Boehner of Ohio, has called for cutting nonsecurity discretionary spending to 2008 levels, a step that by some analyses would require an immediate $100 billion reduction.
“Everywhere you look in America today, families and businesses, large and small, are learning to do more with less,” said Michael Steel, a spokesman for Mr. Boehner. “The federal government is going to have to do the same.”
Senate Republicans last week blocked an omnibus spending measure put forward by Democrats that would have cut $29 billion from President Obama’s budget requests, prompting an outcry from Democrats who said that Republicans were trying to starve the government and that the stopgap measures, known as continuing resolutions, would only increase costs down the line.
“Nothing good comes from a C.R.,” Senator Daniel K. Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii and the chairman of the Appropriations Committee, said in a somber floor speech last week, rebuking Republicans. “The continuing resolution, by design, mandates that programs are to be held at the amounts provided last year regardless of merit or need,” Mr. Inouye said. “Moreover, in the vacuum that this creates, it is left to the bureaucrats to determine how taxpayer funds are allocated, not elected representatives.”
For Republicans, however, there were numerous strategic advantages in holding up a spending deal. Not only will they hold more power in Congress when the latest spending measure runs out in March, but they are already making it difficult for the Obama administration to put its big legislative accomplishments into effect, including the health care and financial regulation laws.
“The voters don’t want us to wait to cut spending and debt and fight the health care bill next October — they want us to do these things immediately,” the Senate Republican leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, said in a floor speech.
Congress can make adjustments in the temporary spending measures, but they are limited. The latest stopgap includes several adjustments. It imposes a two-year wage freeze for most federal employees, and it provides emergency financing for some programs, including Pell grant scholarships that would have been reduced or eliminated for more than 400,000 low-income students.
Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa and chairman of the labor, health and education appropriations subcommittee, praised the deal to safeguard the scholarships, but denounced the fallback to a temporary spending measure. He noted that the Appropriations Committee had approved all of the regular spending bills, even though the full Senate had never acted on them.
“When Republicans killed this omnibus appropriations bill last week,” Mr. Harkin said in a floor speech on Tuesday, “they chose to close Head Start classrooms that serve 65,000 low-income children.”
“They rejected the opportunity to provide life-saving drugs to people living with AIDS who are on waiting lists,” he added. “They passed on the chance to provide 4.5 million more meals to seniors in need.”
Also eliminated from the stopgap measure were the lawmaker-directed spending items known as earmarks. Republicans have voted internally to ban earmarks in the next Congress, but Democrats would not go along, raising another potential cause for deadlock over spending bills.
The omnibus measure defeated last week included thousands of earmarks, many for state and local programs, like the Alamo Area Rape Crisis Center, due to get $400,000, and the Lincoln/Lancaster County Child Advocacy Center in Nebraska, which would have received $250,000 to help child abuse victims.
The spending problems are particularly frustrating for agencies like the I.R.S. and the S.E.C. that add more money to government accounts than they spend. Michelle Eldridge, an I.R.S. spokeswoman, said that the agency remained committed to its systems upgrade and that it was premature to speculate on the impact of the delayed financing.
“We are disappointed that today’s short-term continuing resolution did not contain increased funding” for the upgrade, Ms. Eldridge said.
