December 10, 2010 – Today, Nebraska’s Senator Ben Nelson said he has been assured that the U.S. State Department has not reached a decision on whether to approve the proposed TransCanada Keystone XL Pipeline through Nebraska, clearing up earlier concern the department had already made up its mind to approve the project.
“I, and many Nebraskans, welcome assurances that the State Department hasn’t decided to approve the Keystone pipeline project before a thorough study of its environmental impact on Nebraska’s Sandhills and the Ogallala Aquifer is completed,” Senator Nelson said. “It’s also good to learn that the department won’t consider the pipeline permit application until the environmental study is done and the department has taken into account all state and federal views about the proposal.”
On October 21, Nelson sent a letter to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton raising concerns about comments she’d made after a speech to the Commonwealth Club of San Francisco that seemed to indicate the department had already decided to endorse the project, even though it hadn’t completed a federally required Environmental Impact Statement.
This week, Clinton responded, saying that no decision had been reached, that an environmental study of the project is ongoing and only after that process, with public comment, is complete will the department move to consider the permit application seeking approval of the pipeline.
In a December 9 letter to Nelson, Clinton wrote: “We have not made a decision on the Keystone XL pipeline, and will not make one until we complete all steps of our review process. The Department has a strong commitment to the environment and ensuring that decisions related to the pipeline are fully informed.”
The text of Secretary Clinton’s letter follows:
December 9, 2010
The Honorable Ben Nelson
United States Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510
Dear Senator Nelson:
Thank you for your October 21 letter regarding the TransCanada Keystone XL Pipeline. The Department recognizes that ensuring the Keystone XL Pipeline receives a complete environmental, including any potential impacts on the Nebraska Sandhills and the Ogallala Aquifer, is an important issue for you, your constituents, and the State of Nebraska. We are undertaking a meticulous environmental review, consistent with the National Environmental Policy Act and Executive Order 13337 (E.O. 13337).
We have not made a decision on the Keystone XL pipeline, and will not make one until we complete all steps of our review process. The Department has a strong commitment to the environment and ensuring that decisions related to the pipeline are fully informed.
Department officials are currently reviewing public comments on the draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) and making edits to that document. We have not yet decided whether the next version of the EIS will be a supplemental draft EIS or a final EIS. Once the final EIS is issued, however, the federal agencies identified in E.O. 13337 will have 90 days to express their views on whether granting the application would be in the national interest. When the interagency consultation process is complete, the permit application will be prepared for a final Department decision.
In order for the State Department to make a sound decision, it is important that we conduct our review in a thorough and transparent manner, taking into consideration all relevant factors, including both environmental and economic impacts.
Thank you for your interest. I hope that this information is helpful to you.
