December 16, 2010 – Today, in a Senate floor speech, Nebraska's Senator Ben Nelson addressed criticisms and merits of the proposed New START treaty, and explained why the nuclear arms reduction agreement between the U.S. and Russia should be ratified soon by the U.S. Senate. The text of Senator Nelson's floor speech follows:
"Mr. President: I rise to discuss the New START Treaty. In the last 40 years, our country has participated in numerous arms control and nonproliferation efforts. They are a critical element of our national security strategy.
If done right, arms control agreements can enhance U.S. national security by promoting transparency and information-sharing that can inform us about the size, make-up, and operations of other military forces.
They also provide other countries with information about our force and capabilities…and that promotes a strategic balance and discourages an attack on the U.S. or its allies. Transparency and information-sharing enable our military planners to better prepare for a real threat. Without such agreements and understandings, our military and the military of countries like Russia must prepare for worst-case scenarios.
That leads to inefficient, runaway defense spending. If that sounds familiar, that is because we've been down that road before – it was called the arms race.
The U.S. and USSR poured massive resources into building not only vast stockpiles of nuclear weapons, but also on the expansive systems needed to defend against incoming bombers and missiles.Since the late 1960s, arms control agreements and other measures have worked to reduce nuclear forces and systems that support them.
I'd note that former President Ronald Reagan, who accelerated nuclear modernization and launched the 'Star Wars' missile defense effort, overcame his initial distaste for arms control agreements. Working with Soviet Premier Gorbachev, Reagan laid the foundation for today's START treaty.
In July 1991, Presidents Bush and Gorbachev signed the START I treaty and the Senate later approved it on an overwhelming and bipartisan vote of 93-6 - a vote which concluded after four days of floor debate. Nebraska's senators at the time, J.J. Exon and Bob Kerrey both supported the START 1 treaty.
As we consider New START, it is our Constitutional duty to address today's concerns and the treaty's merits. I've heard five main concerns during debate. They are:
Treaty limitations on missile defense.
Sufficiency of modernization plans for nuclear enterprise.
Adequacy of treaty verification measures.
Force structure changes resulting from treaty reductions.
And the timing of the Senate's deliberations of the treaty
First, the New START treaty won't affect any current or planned U.S. missile defense efforts. Some point to language in the treaty's preamble and the inclusion of unilateral statements. But they are not legally binding. And changing the preamble would unravel the treaty. The only binding restriction on missile defense systems arises in Article 5. It prevents conversion of ICBM silos into missile defense launchers. That has no practical effect because converting silos is more expensive and less desirable than building new silos.
Second, some have questioned the administration's commitment to modernize our nuclear facilities and forces. As the Chairman of the Armed Services' Strategic Forces subcommittee, I held 3 hearings this year addressing the health of our nuclear weapons complex.
I'd note that the administration asked for $7 billion in FY 2011 for stockpile sustainment and infrastructure investments. That is roughly 10% more than 2010 funding. The Administration also plans to invest $80 billion in the next decade to sustain and modernize the nuclear weapons complex. That's the biggest commitment to the nuclear enterprise in more than a decade. On top of that, the Administration recently offered an additional $4 billion toward modernization goals.
Third, some argue that verification measures are less rigorous than for START I. Its verification measures expired last December. So, as of today, we've gone 376 days without on-site monitoring and verification in Russia. The less we are allowed to see for ourselves the more uncertainty we'll feel about Russian forces.
New START includes verification measures allowing 18 on-site inspections annually. We determine where and when to go, with very little advance notice to the Russians. As many of you know, this treaty counts every warhead and delivery system and tracks them with unique identifiers. That's a tremendous advancement in transparency over the previous system of attribution.
Fourth, some express concern about the treaty's impact on the nuclear triad—our strategic bombers, missiles and ballistic missile submarines. In testimony and in direct conversations with me, our military leaders have assured that the New START retains the triad. Proposed reductions by the Pentagon aim to spread across all systems and minimize impacts to any one system or base, thus retaining a safe, secure, and effective triad.
Finally, some indicate that considering New START now prevents the Senate from spending adequate time to consider the treaty, or that we would be rushing judgment on the treaty. New START was signed in April of this year, and the Senate has had it for consideration since May. Together, the Foreign Relations, Intelligence, and Armed Services Committees have held 21 hearings and briefings related to the treaty. The truth is that the Senate has been actively deliberating New START for 7 months.
By comparison, The 2002 Moscow Treaty took nine months to complete and START I took a little more than a year. When it came to floor debate, the 1991 START I treaty required four days of debate, while START II, the Chemical Weapons Convention, and the 2002 Moscow Treaty each took two days.
I am confident that the Senate has fulfilled its responsibility to fully consider and deliberate New START, and our actions are entirely consistent with the past actions of this body in considering arms control agreements.
Those are concerns. Let's look now at merits.
In recent months, I've spoken about this treaty with key current military leaders including Secretary Gates, Admiral Mullen, General Cartwright, and General Chilton. Each has expressed full support and participation in this treaty. They also fully support the proposed reductions to the nuclear arsenal and the continued sustainment of the nuclear triad.
In addition, Secretary Clinton and every living former secretary of state—nine in total-- have all publically voiced their support. Five former secretaries of defense have endorsed the treaty. Seven former Strategic Command commanders have endorsed the treat. STRATCOM, headquartered in my state of Nebraska, oversees America's strategic nuclear, non-nuclear and cyber defenses. Also, it's important, I believe, that U.S. Strategic Command played a key role in the negotiating the treaty.
With that experience, General Chilton has said: 'Our nation will be safer and more secure with this treaty than without it. What we negotiated to is absolutely acceptable to the United States Strategic Command for what we need to do to provide the deterrent for the country.'
I wholeheartedly agree.
I am prepared to vote to ratify the New START Treaty because: It promotes our national security and can make America and the world safer. It increases transparency between nuclear nations. It promotes cooperation and not suspicion. And it reduces the possibility of a nuclear exchange and still enables America to respond to the terrible threats that continue in the Nuclear Age. I'd like to elaborate.
America will be stronger if we can continue to look under Russia's hood, and they under ours. "Trust but verify" still works.
This treaty will help U.S. Strategic Command accomplish its absolutely vital mission for our nation.
Further, as the chairman of the US Russia Inter-Parliamentary Group, I have held many meetings with my Russian counterparts about this treaty. It's a step in the right direction to encourage further cooperation between the U.S. and Russia.
As we work toward cooperation, the treaty reestablishes verification measures and increases transparency. That will reduce uncertainty about Russian forces, and increase their predictability.
Without this treaty, our understanding of Russian nuclear forces would deteriorate. We would have a tendency for U.S forces to overcompensate for what we don't know. That's a losing strategy in an era of large budget deficits and needed fiscal constraint.
Entering into this treaty demonstrates our commitment to modernizing the nuclear stockpile by making the most of what we have to spend.
The New START Treaty offers the possibility of providing our military with insights needed to efficiently and successfully provide a safe, reliable and secure nuclear deterrent.
At the end of the day, the New START treaty builds on successes from previous treaties, and paves the way for further agreements between the US and Russia.
It moves us further away from a nuclear war no one wants. Even as it does, we'll retain a powerful and effective deterrent capability.
And finally, ratification also will send a strong message to those around the world opposed to proliferation and those seeking to proliferate.
For these reasons, I support the New START treaty and believe the Senate should ratify it soon."
