December 15, 2010 – Today, Nebraska’s Senator Ben Nelson issued this statement as he voted for a bipartisan $858 billion tax relief bill the U.S. Senate approved on an overwhelming 81-19 vote.
“This bipartisan tax cut plan is about jobs. It’s a win for Nebraska families, Nebraska businesses, and Nebraskans who are struggling between jobs,” said Senator Nelson. “Keeping taxes low is critical right now so that families and businesses in Nebraska, and nationwide, can use their own money to create economic activity and jobs that will grow our economy back to prosperity.
“The bill should keep Nebraskans from worrying about an estate tax burden for the next two years and gives all Nebraska taxpayers a 2 percent payroll tax cut. It also extends tax relief provisions that will protect jobs and families, including an ethanol tax credit, a biodiesel tax credit and the 1603 tax investment credit for renewable energy. If the ethanol tax credit is allowed to expire, it would create financial trouble for Nebraska’s 25 plants and could result in us losing 13,700 jobs. The 1603 provision saved 55,000 jobs nationwide tied to wind energy, and extending it will protect jobs and help America become more energy independent.
“This tax relief will provide a major shot in the arm for Nebraskans and our economy and it’s great to see that it enjoys strong bipartisan support. Washington is doing what people expect: working together for them,” said Senator Nelson.
The bipartisan tax cut bill extends by two years all of the 2001 and 2003 individual income tax cuts. It includes a $120 billion payroll tax reduction for workers, extends unemployment insurance benefits for 13 month, extends the American Opportunity Tax Credit (college tuition), the Child Tax Credit and the Earned Income Tax Credit, allows businesses to deduct 100% of certain investments in the first year, extends the current capital gains and dividends rates for all taxpayers for an additional two years, through 2012, extends AMT relief for two years and increases the estate tax exemption to $5 million (indexed for inflation) and reduces the top rate to 35 percent for 2011 and 2012, and extends various other tax provisions.”
