WASHINGTON, D.C.  -  The White House has decided not to allow any new oil drilling in the eastern Gulf of Mexico for at least the next seven years, a senior administration official told The Associated Press today.

The official told AP’s Brendan Farrington that drilling leases won't be considered in the waters off Florida – a position that mirrors one steadfastly held for decades by Florida’s senior U.S. Sen. Bill Nelson.  

“It’s good the president is listening to the people of Florida,” Nelson said this morning.

Interior Secretary Ken Salazar reportedly will discuss the decision at a news conference this afternoon, the AP reported.

Said a Nelson spokesman, Dan McLaughlin, “Drilling off Florida’s Gulf coast is banned at least until 2022, under a 2006 law passed by Sen. Nelson.  The senator is pleased the White House has decided rightly to keep the area off-limits. 
 
“He hopes Florida’s next governor and the Legislature similarly will commit to protecting the state’s tourism economy and unique environment,” McLaughlin said.

Nelson is scheduled to meet with Florida’s Gov.-elect Rick Scott about oil drilling and high-speed rail, among other issues, at 4:30 p.m. today in no. 716 of the Hart Senate Office Building.
 
Nelson has fought for decades to keep rigs off Florida because, he has argued, one spill could ruin the state’s tourism-driven economy and destroy some of the world’s most-protected environmental sites.  It also would interfere with the last unfettered military training range for pilots in the eastern Gulf.
 
In 2006, the oil industry came very close to winning approval for putting drilling rigs close to Florida’s coast.  But Nelson successfully launched a filibuster and helped broker a bipartisan deal with then-U.S. Sen. Mel Martinez that walls off Florida from drilling until 2022.
Still, the state could decide to allow rigs in waters it controls that roughly are about ten miles into the Gulf and three miles into the Atlantic.  Floridastate lawmakers, and even Gov. Charlie Crist, were considering opening those waters to drilling before the BP oil spill earlier this year.
