Washington - U.S. Senators Blanche Lincoln and Mark Pryor and U.S. Representative Marion Berry (AR-01) today announced that the city of Marked Tree will receive a $600,000 Economic Development Administration grant to construct an industrial railroad spur that will connect the future Awesome Products, Inc. facility in Marked Tree to the existing railroad track. The new facility is expected to create 90 to 120 jobs in its first year of operation and create up to 300 jobs over the next four years.
The Economic Development Administration recently approved the funding, which Lincoln, Gov. Mike Beebe and local leaders announced in early October. Awesome Products, a manufacturer of laundry detergent, fabric softener and household bleach and chemicals, will open a new manufacturing facility in Marked Tree as well as expand its current West Memphis facilities.
In Marked Tree, Awesome Products will be manufacturing sodium hypochloride used to make household bleach. The new railroad spur will help the company transport its products.
“This investment will help create manufacturing jobs in Marked Tree and support long-term economic growth for the area,” Lincoln said. “I was proud to join local leaders to announce this expansion in early October, and pleased to have been able to work with the Economic Development Administration to secure this funding. Creating jobs and putting unemployed Arkansans back to work has been my top priority, and I look forward to seeing firsthand the economic development and job creation that results from this new facility.”
“Strong transportation infrastructure is critical to economic development and job growth in our local communities,” Pryor said. “This investment will allow Marked Tree to support a new manufacturing facility and bring hundreds of jobs to the area.”
“I am thankful to the Economic Development Administration for recognizing what a huge impact Awesome Products’ locating here will have on Marked Tree and the surrounding area,” Berry said. “The Mayor and local leadership should also be commended for their recruiting efforts. I look forward to seeing the residual results from this investment for years to come.”
“We appreciate this investment that will create jobs and help grow our economy in Marked Tree,” said Dixon Chandler, Mayor of Marked Tree. “We have worked hard over the last several years to bring Awesome Products to Marked Tree, and this new facility puts us in a perfect position to continue to boost economic development in our city.”
