Jonesboro—U.S. Senator Blanche Lincoln (D-Ark.) today joined Governor Mike Beebe and Nordex USA officials to celebrate the official opening of its flagship wind turbine manufacturing plant in Jonesboro. Since breaking ground on the plant last September, Nordex has already hired 54 employees. The plant hopes to employ 100 workers by the end of the year and up to 850 employees by 2014.
Lincoln has worked to ensure Nordex’s $40 million investment in Jonesboro could become a reality. She voted for the Recovery Act, which offered$22 million in clean energy manufacturing tax credits to secure Nordex jobs. She also helped obtain a $500,000 federal investment for site improvements for Craighead Technology Park. 
Lincoln said she is committed to continuing her work with Governor Beebe, local leaders and Nordex officials to ensure the success of the Nordex facility and the continued economic growth of the Jonesboro area.
 
“I am proud that Nordex is helping to make Arkansas a leader in wind manufacturing, and they chose well in making Jonesboro the site for the plant we are celebrating today,” Lincoln said. “I know that the hardworking people of this community are pleased to welcome Nordex and they are ready to get to work. I look forward to the job creation and economic growth opportunities across our state that are sure to result from the investment Nordex has made here. As Chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee, I am committed to ensuring Arkansas’s rural communities are a part of our energy solution – which is vital to bringing good-paying, long-term jobs to Arkansas.”
 
Workers at the 150,000-square-foot Jonesboro plant assemble wind turbine nacelles, which house the engine and other components that are placed on top of the turbine tower. The assembly time for a nacelle is about two weeks, and the Nordex plant has the capacity to produce 300 per year. One Nordex turbine can power about 700 American homes.
 
Arkansas now has one of the largest wind energy manufacturing bases in the nation, and is home to Nordex, LM Wind Power in Little Rock and Mitsubishi in Fort Smith.
