Washington - U.S. Senators Blanche Lincoln and Mark Pryor and U.S. Representative Vic Snyder (AR-02) today announced that Pulaski County will receive a $1 million Economic Development Administration grant to construct the Six Bridges Innovation Conference Center at the Verizon Arena in downtown North Little Rock. The center is expected to create several full time jobs, in addition to dozens of temporary and part time jobs that are due to be added in connection with the events that will take place at the center.
The project will include construction of the conference area, exhibit and kitchen space, and the purchase of folding partitions that will allow the space to be divided into three smaller conference rooms. The Six Bridges Innovation Conference Center will host businesses, schools and other organizations and allow them to collaborate on ways to advance innovation, entrepreneurship and cultural enrichment in Pulaski County.
Construction will begin in early 2011, and the center is expected to open within the year.
“This investment will help create construction jobs in North Little Rock and support long-term economic growth in the area,” Lincoln said. “I am proud to have been able to work with the Economic Development Administration to secure this funding. The Six Bridges Innovation Conference Center will be a great resource for businesses and organizations throughout Arkansas, and I look forward to seeing the economic development that results from this funding.”
“The Six Bridges Innovation Conference Center will help bring together business, industry, and community leaders to share best practices and come up with the next great idea,” Pryor said. “This investment will help jumpstart the economy in Pulaski County and foster new opportunities within the community.”
“This Economic Development Administration funding is a great opportunity to promote economic growth in Pulaski County by bringing the Verizon Arena to its full potential,” said Pulaski County Judge Buddy Villines. “The Six Bridges Innovation Conference Center will be utilized by businesses and organizations to exchange ideas on innovation, entrepreneurship and other areas, and I appreciate our congressional delegation for their efforts in helping secure this grant.”
