Washington –U.S. Senators Blanche Lincoln and Mark Pryor today urged their colleagues to support the nomination of Paul K. “P.K.” Holmes III, of Fort Smith to serve on the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Arkansas. The Senate Judiciary Committee approved Mr. Holmes’s nomination today, and he must now be confirmed by the full Senate.
Senators Lincoln and Pryor recommended Mr. Holmes for the position last December, and he was nominated by the President in April.
“The Western District of Arkansas will be well served by Mr. Holmes as their District Judge,” Lincoln said. “His exceptional credentials have qualified him to serve the people of Arkansas, as he has throughout his legal career. Mr. Holmes is a well known and well respected lawyer from Ft. Smith with a wealth of experience in both the public and private sectors, and he received an outpouring of support for his candidacy from Arkansans who know him both professionally and personally. I am pleased that the Judiciary Committee has approved his nomination and hope that he will be confirmed by the Senate quickly.”
“P.K. Holmes’ strong legal credentials and work in his community have garnered him respect throughout Arkansas,” Pryor said.  “I am pleased that the Senate Judiciary Committee has agreed to move forward with Mr. Holmes’ nomination, and I hope that he will receive quick confirmation by the full Senate.  I am confident that his commitment to a fair, impartial justice system will serve Arkansas’s Western District well.”
Background on Mr. Holmes
Mr. Holmes is currently a partner at Warner, Smith & Harris in Ft. Smith where he began his career as an associate in 1978.  From 1993 to 2001, P.K. left the firm when President Bill Clinton appointed him -- and the Senate confirmed him -- as the U.S. Attorney for the Western District of Arkansas. 
He is a 1973 graduate of Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri, and received his J.D. from the University of Arkansas in Fayetteville in 1978.
Also known as a leader in his community, P.K. was once named Lawyer of the Year for the Arkansas Volunteer Lawyers for the Elderly, and serves on the Board of Trustees for Lyo
