WASHINGTON – U.S. Senators Blanche Lincoln and Mark Pryor along with U.S. Representative Mike Ross (AR-04) today announced that the El Dorado Fire Department will receive a $70,304 grant from the Department of Homeland Security’s Assistance to Firefighters Grants (AFG) program.  The funds will be used to enhance operations and safety.
“This funding will give firefighters in El Dorado the support they need to protect families and keep our communities safe,” Lincoln said. “Firefighters work tirelessly and risk their lives to protect our communities, and we owe it to them to make sure they have the resources they need to do their jobs.”
“Local firefighters are on the front lines in the fight to keep our families and homes safe,” Pryor said. “This investment will allow El Dorado firefighters to do their jobs effectively and efficiently so they can protect their community.”
“Our communities rely on local fire fighters and first responders to help protect our homes and keep our families safe,” said Ross.  “I am pleased to help announce these federal funds for El Dorado because ensuring these brave individuals have the support they need to quickly answer the needs of their citizens should always be a top priority.”
The Assistance to Firefighters Grant (AFG) Program of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is an important component of the larger, coordinated effort to strengthen the nation’s overall level of preparedness and ability to respond to fire and related hazards.
AFG provides fire departments and EMS organizations the tools and resources necessary to protect the health and safety of the public and emergency response personnel.  In Fiscal Year 2010, DHS Assistance to Firefighters Grant Program will award approximately $390 million directly to fire departments and EMS organizations to enhance their response capabilities and to more effectively protect the health and safety of the public and emergency response personnel with respect to fire and all other hazards.
