Washington - U.S. Senators Blanche Lincoln and Mark Pryor and U.S. Representative Vic Snyder (AR-02) today announced that Arkansas Children’s Hospital in Little Rock will receive an $846,992 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services grant to support medical education programs that train pediatric resident physicians to care for young patients.
“This funding will help resident physicians at Arkansas Children’s Hospital gain the experience and expertise they need to provide the best care for their patients,” Lincoln said. “This investment will enhance the well-being of children in our state, and I will continue working to secure resources that expand access and improve the quality of health care for Arkansans.”
“Every child deserves high-quality health care, and that includes doctors who understand how to address the needs of young patients,” Pryor said. “This investment will help ensure that the physicians at Arkansas Children’s Hospital have the knowledge and skills necessary to give our children the best care possible.”
“For the last 10 years, Arkansas Children’s Hospital has enjoyed support from the Children’s Hospital Graduate Medical Education Payment Program, which helps support the training of pediatric and other residents in graduate medical education programs, and we’re delighted to see this continue,” said Jonathan Bates, MD, president and CEO for Arkansas Children’s Hospital.
“The importance of being able to train proficient pediatricians in the United States has never been a higher priority. With the challenging work force issues, the support of graduate medical education is vital to have pediatricians available for our children,” said Richard F. Jacobs MD, FAAP, professor and chairman, Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, and president, Arkansas Children's Hospital Research Institute. “The support to Children’s Hospitals for graduate medical education is crucial since a very large fraction of the pediatricians being trained today receive their education and training experience in a Children’s Hospital. That is certainly the case at Arkansas Children’s Hospital.”
