WASHINGTON – U.S. Senators Blanche Lincoln and Mark Pryor and U.S. Congressmen Marion Berry (AR-01), Vic Snyder (AR-02), John Boozman (AR-03) and Mike Ross (AR-04) today announced that the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) has designated all 75 counties in Arkansas eligible for natural disaster assistance because of agricultural losses caused by drought, excessive heat and related insects and diseases that occurred during the period of April 1, 2010, and continuing.
A USDA Secretarial disaster designation makes farmers in primary and contiguous counties eligible to receive assistance to help compensate for production losses on crops. Farmers in eligible counties have eight months to apply for emergency loan assistance from the Farm Service Agency. In addition, the disaster designations may make producers who suffered crop losses in those counties eligible for the 2010 Supplemental Revenue Assistance Program (SURE) program.
“Arkansas has experienced its share of disruptive and dangerous weather over the past few years, and this summer’s drought, heat and other threats have taken a major economic toll on our farmers,” said Lincoln, Chairman of the U.S. Senate Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry Committee. “I have been working closely with the Governor's office and delegation members to help secure these disaster declarations so our farmers and ranchers can be eligible for emergency loans.”
“Farms are the lifeblood of many Arkansas communities, and the severe weather and disease farmers have faced this year are hitting rural families hard,” Pryor said.  “This designation will allow farmers to receive the assistance they need to make ends meet and strengthen local economies.”
“Arkansas needs this assistance.  Our farmers have faced multiple challenges and we must ensure that producers can stay afloat as agriculture is such a critical component of our economy,” said Snyder.
"Our agriculture community is essential to the economy of the Natural State. While our farm families and businesses are working to make it through these difficult economic times, recent weather events are putting strains on the industry. I am pleased that the federal government recognizes the importance of Arkansas's agriculture economy and is coming to its aid in this time of need and I will continue to work to provide the resources our farmers need to recover from their losses," Boozman said.
“Arkansas farmers and farm families have faced numerous challenges this year from drought to disease, making an already tough economic situation even tougher,” said Ross. “Federal assistance like this is needed to help our communities make it through these difficult times and I will continue working in our nation’s capital to ensure we have the necessary resources to recover from whatever challenges may come our way.”
Once farmers apply for emergency loan assistance, the Farm Service Agency will consider each application on its own merit by taking into account the extent of losses and the applicant’s ability to repay the loan. More information on assistance is available from the Arkansas Farm Service Agency at (501) 301-3000 and at local county Farm Service Agency offices.
