U.S. Senator Byron Dorgan (D-N.D.) released details of an oil refinery study Tuesday that shows “real promise” for building a new 34,000 barrel per day diesel and naphtha refinery in North Dakota.

“This report provides some important possibilities for North Dakota’s energy industry that could help to reduce future diesel shortages like the current one in our state.” Dorgan said. “The oil boom in North Dakota is expected to last for decades, so we need to be forward-thinking when it comes to increasing the region’s refining capability. The Tesoro facility in Mandan is an excellent refinery, but this study shows that increasing the region’s refining capacity can also be an option and ought to be considered. ”

North Dakota has suffered from diesel shortages in recent years that have pinched consumers at the pump and threatened fuel supplies important to agriculture and oil development. 

In response to these shortages, Dorgan - as chairman of the Senate Energy and Water Development Appropriations Subcommittee - secured nearly $500,000 last year for a study to examine the feasibility of increasing oil refining capacity in North Dakota. The North Dakota Association of Rural Electric Cooperatives was chosen to oversee the study coordinating an industry-led advisory board and steering committee. 

The advisory board and steering committee used those federal funds to examine the costs and benefits associated with the expansion of refining capacity in the region as well as the most promising ways to build a new refinery. 

Analysis by the Corval Group, Purvin and Gertz Inc. and Mustang Engineers and Constructors, the consultants hired by the panel, showed that a new diesel and naphtha facility is a promising possibility. Naphtha is a byproduct of diesel refining that is in high demand in Canada, where it is used to dilute heavy tar sand crude for pipeline movement. 

The consultant’s analysis showed that a diesel and naphtha refinery would have significant benefits for North Dakota including increased oil tax revenues and income tax revenues, as well as fuel cost savings to the diesel dependent sectors of the economy like agriculture and energy. In addition, direct employment at such a facility is estimated to be 150 workers with average salaries of $70,000 to $80,000 per year. The consultant’s report says that building a 34,000 barrel per day diesel and naphtha facility would cost around $700 million and could be constructed with the right kind of financing.

“This study shows that a new refinery will create good energy jobs while helping address frequent diesel shortages in North Dakota,” Dorgan said. “Allocations of diesel during harvest have always presented difficult challenges to farmers. A project like this would also have a national impact, by helping to lessen America’s dangerous dependence on foreign oil.”

Other refinery options were studied such as gasoline, but the consultants said that the diesel and naphtha facility showed the most promise.

As a senior member of the Senate’s Energy and Natural Resources Committee, chairman of the Energy and Water Development Appropriations Subcommittee, and chairman of the Indian Affairs Committee, Dorgan has played a key role in boosting North Dakota oil development. 

The U.S. Geological Survey’s assessment of North Dakota’s Bakken Shale formation that Dorgan requested in 2008 gained worldwide attention. It showed that the formation is the largest “continuous” oil accumulation the agency has ever assessed in the Lower 48, with estimated technically recoverable reserves of nearly four billion barrels. Dorgan also led the effort to establish a ‘one-stop shop’ to expedite petroleum permit reviews on the Fort Berthold Reservation.
