Mr. President, the amendment of Senator Thune would amend the treaty by changing one of the elements of the treaty, which is the number of deployed strategic forces that we have. Under the treaty, the limit, of course, is 700. But the critically important part to our military is that each side would have the ability to change the mix to reach 700 as it suits our respective needs.

The amendment of Senator Thune would alter the limit of 700 to 720 deployed SLBMs, heavy bombers equipped with nuclear arms, and ICBMs. These limits, as the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee has just said, were agreed upon only after careful analysis by the U.S. military leadership, particularly General Chilton who is the commander of our U.S. Strategic Command and the man responsible for these strategic systems.

Senator Kerry has quoted General Chilton. I want to add one additional quote of his which he testified to before the Armed Services Committee on July 20 of this year. General Chilton stated that the force levels in the treaty meet the current guidance for deterrence for the United States. By the way, that guidance was laid out by President George W. Bush.

The options we provided in this process focused on ensuring America's ability to continue to deter potential adversaries, assure our allies, and sustain strategic stability for as long as nuclear weapons exist. This rigorous approach, rooted in deterrence strategy and assessment of potential adversary capabilities--here are the key words-- supports both the agreed-upon limits in the new START and recommendations in the Nuclear Posture Review (NPR).

So General Chilton is on record in a number of places very precisely and specifically saying that the options which were provided, including the one which was adopted here, rooted in the strategy, rooted in the provisions, the guidance as laid out by President Bush, support the agreed upon limits in the START treaty. I don't know how much more precise and I don't know how much more significant you can get with the words of the commander who is in charge of these weapons.

The 1251 report, the report says up to those numbers. It is not specifically committed to those numbers. The important thing about the report is not just that it says up to in I think at least two of the three cases it also says it is important that we remain flexible as to this number.

So the 700 force structure that is in the treaty would retain the nuclear triad, retains all three delivery legs, bombers, SLBMs, and ICBMs. On that point General Chilton said we are going to retain the vital nuclear delivery systems, and if there is a failure technically in one of the nuclear systems, we can rearrange our deployed force structure and treaty limits to compensate.

Some have said the United States will have to make significant reductions to reach the 700 level and the Russians will have to make none. According to General Chilton, this argument is a distraction. What he said is that the ``new START limits''--in his words, the ``new START limits the number of Russian ballistic missile warheads that can target the United States, missiles that pose the most prompt threat to our forces and our Nation. Regardless of whether Russia would have kept its missile force levels within those limits without a new START treaty, upon ratification they would now be required to do so.'' And that certainly is very important to our Strategic Commander, General Chilton, because he said:

The constraints of the treaty actually do constrain Russia with regard to deployed launchers and deployed strategic weapons, and that is an important element as well. Without that they are unconstrained.

He explained that the limits were important because without those limits

There would be no constraints placed upon the Russian Federation as the number of strategic delivery systems or warheads they could deploy. And I think it is important for the United States- -he concluded-- that there be limits there, limits that we would also be bound by, obviously.

General Chilton is not only comfortable with the limits in this treaty, it was his analysis that formed the underpinning for the 700 limit. He doesn't need the strategic, the additional 20 strategic nuclear delivery systems to maintain our strong deterrence, and other than to kill this treaty there is no reason to add these 20 additional systems. We should respect General Chilton's judgment that the United States can maintain an effective deterrent and that such a change would kill this treaty.
