Mr. President, the Risch amendment states a concern which is a legitimate concern. I think probably everybody would agree to that. This concern was there in the START I treaty and it was there in the Moscow Treaty just a few years ago, that we need to address the imbalance or the--the imbalance, I guess, is a good word--between the number of strategic nuclear weapons that exist on both sides and the nonstrategic weapons. But that was true during START I in 1991 when President Bush negotiated it. There was no effort to, in effect, kill the treaty with an amendment stating that concern, although it was a concern then. During the Moscow Treaty debate here in 2002, I believe Senator Biden again raised the same concern about this imbalance. It is a legitimate concern. But you don't kill a treaty because there are some legitimate concerns about issues.

The Russians have a concern about our large number of warehoused warheads. We have a big inventory of warheads compared to them. They have a concern. We could state that as a fact, that the Russians have a concern about the number of warheads we have. But putting that into the treaty kills the treaty.

We could make any statement of legitimate concern. If it is in the treaty text, it will kill the treaty.

Senator Biden, in 2002, I believe, or it may have even been in the first START treaty, raised this issue about the imbalance. It was a legitimate issue. But there was no effort to kill that treaty which had been negotiated by President Bush by inserting a legitimate concern into the treaty.

There are a number of legitimate concerns. The Russians have legitimate concerns about our conventional capabilities, about accuracy, about our encryption capabilities. They were not addressed adequately for the Russians in this treaty. But they have a concern. Should we state in the treaty the fact of legitimate concern? Should we by amendment attempt to insert in the treaty that the factual statement of a legitimate concern just kills the treaty?

That is what concerns me as to why it is that there is such a determination to try to kill this treaty by means of an amendment which states a legitimate concern, which was true during the last two treaties negotiated by two President Bushes. That is what troubles me. That was the difference Senator Corker pointed out between seeking to amend a resolution and seeking to amend the treaty.

To Senator Risch, through the Chair, I happen to share the same concern the Senator has about this imbalance. As chairman of the Armed Services Committee, this imbalance existed in 2002, it existed in 1991, and we ought to address it, but we don't address it by killing this treaty, and that is what this amendment does.

Despite the absence of this language expressing a legitimate concern, we have support for this treaty by former President George H.W. Bush and Secretaries Brown, Carlucci, Cohen, Perry, and Schlesinger. They support this treaty without this language. It was true that former Secretary Schlesinger said, for instance, that he has a concern about this imbalance. I think we all do. He stated that concern. He still supports the treaty without this language, without this expression of concern.

Former Secretaries of the State Albright, Baker, Christopher, Eagleburger, Kissinger, Powell, Rice, and Shulz support the treaty without this language. They have the same concerns. As a matter of fact, I believe it was Senator Sessions--it may have been someone else--who said that former Secretary Kissinger has expressed this concern, in fact quoted, I believe, from former Secretary Kissinger's writing on this issue. He has that same concern which Senator Risch and all of us have about this imbalance. But without the language, former Secretary Kissinger still supports this treaty.

All I can say is that I think there is a legitimate concern which is expressed in this amendment. It is a concern which has existed and needs to be addressed, as former Senator Biden said when he was debating a treaty--but not to kill a treaty by an expression of a legitimate concern.

That is what I think is the issue here--not whether the language in the Risch amendment expresses something which is legitimate but whether the absence of that concern being expressed in the treaty should be enough to vote for this amendment and to kill this treaty as a result and to force it back to an open-ended negotiation, which we have no idea where that would lead.

I hope we defeat the Risch amendment not because we disagree with what the concern is but because, understanding that concern, we do not want to do damage to the treaty and kill a treaty which does so much for the security of this Nation.
