Today, U.S. Senator Charles E. Schumer announced that the Town and Country Fire Department, in Horseheads has received a federal grant totaling $97,375 as part of Round 3 of the FY10 Assistance to Firefighters Grant (AFG) Program administered by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The funding will be used improve departmental operations and safety.
 
“This essential grant ensures that our fire fighters in Chemung  County will continue to have the basic resources required to do their jobs, improve safety and save lives,” said Schumer. “First responders across the region have been hurting from budget cuts while firefighters deal with the everyday stress of their work. These funds are truly a life saving investment that will provide our local first responders with indispensable resources and support, so they can be better prepared for emergencies.”
 
Schumer was among the first senators who recognized the need for the federal government to establish a funding program for local governments and fire departments to help defray the rising costs of equipment and fire prevention. The Operations and Firefighter Safety Program funds can go towards training, equipment, personal protective equipment, wellness and fitness, and modifications to fire stations and facilities. 
 
The Town and Country Fire Department in Horseheads will use the federal funding to purchase more advanced two way radios so that firefighters can better communicate with EMS officials.

The Assistance to Firefighters Grant Program assists local fire departments in programs and activities to improve the effectiveness of firefighting operations through specialized emergency training for response to situations like terrorist attacks; enhancement of emergency medical services programs; development of health and safety initiatives; establishment of fire education and prevention programs; creation of wellness and fitness programs; and equipment and facility upgrades. 
 
Schumer added: “We can never truly repay our first responders for their heroic efforts and dedication to duty. But we can make certain that they have the training and resources they need to do their job and do their job well. This federal money will ensure that the men and women who put their lives on the line to protect us get the resources they need to keep themselves and our communities safe.”
 
The Assistance to Firefighters Grant Program is administered by the Department of Homeland Security in cooperation with the Department’s United States Fire Administration. The grants are awarded on a competitive basis to the applicants that most closely address the program's priorities and demonstrate financial need.
