U.S. Senator Charles Schumer today announced that the online retailer, Alibaba.com, has taken down 421 advertisements for counterfeit  D’Addario products being manufactured in China. On Monday, Schumer visited D’Addario in Farmindgale, Long Island to call on Department of Homeland Security Secretary, US Department of Justice (DOJ), and the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative to launch a coordinated crackdown on the makers and distributors of counterfeit D’Addario products and the commercial websites, like Alibaba.com, which were selling or facilitating the sale of the counterfeit music strings. On Wednesday, Alibaba.com confirmed it had removed all advertisements on the site that were selling the counterfeit strings.

 

“I commend Alibaba.com for taking swift and immediate action to halt the sale of these counterfeit strings,” said Schumer. “It is important that retailers do everything in their power to block the sale of counterfeit goods that wind up costing American jobs. Alibaba did the right thing and has pulled down all advertising for knock-off D’Addario strings.”

  

Based in Farmingdale, D’Addario is the world’s leading guitar string maker, employing 800 on Long Island in the manufacturing of world-class guitar strings. The company manufactures approximately 20 million string sets per year and holds the number one or two market share in electric guitar, acoustic guitar, classical guitar and electric bass guitar strings.  Despite the fact that D’Addario makes all of its music strings in the United States, recent investigations have uncovered an extensive counterfeiting operation, based in China, that has been illegally producing and selling sub-grade counterfeit strings, under the D’Addario label, to consumers around the globe.

 

“While Alibaba’s decision is a major victory in our effort to stop the sale of Chinese goods, we also need to shut down counterfeit operations at their source,” continued Schumer. “I am continuing my call for the US Trade Representative to pressure the Chinese government to shut the counterfeit manufacturing sites down.”
