Senator Chris Dodd (D-CT) released the following statement today as the Senate Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions (HELP) Committee conducted a hearing on the reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and the role that teachers and education leaders play in the education of students.
 
“If we want excellent schools—and more than want them, I would argue we desperately need them to compete in the 21st-century economy—we have to provide educators not only with the funding, but with the training and development opportunities they need to improve and excel,” said Dodd. “Teachers need the tools to succeed, the trust to deploy them as they see fit, and the time to show that they can get results.”
 
“That’s not an argument against accountability. That’s an argument for the kind of accountability that encourages success instead of simply punishing shortcomings. And it’s the way we’re going to fulfill the goal of having a great teacher in every classroom,” Dodd continued.
 
Senator Dodd is a senior member of the Senate HELP Committee and chairman of its Subcommittee on Children and Families.
 
Dodd’s full statement, as prepared for delivery, is below.
 
“I’m thrilled to take part in this roundtable, and I’m very grateful to Chairman Harkin and Ranking Member Enzi for setting this up, as well as to our witnesses for joining us today.
 
I think all of us—Democrats and Republicans, teachers and administrators, academics and Senators—we all agree that every child deserves a great teacher.
 
And I think we all agree that part of achieving that goal is holding schools and educators accountable for the results they produce.
 
But I also think that we here in Washington have to keep in mind that it’s the teachers and leaders in the classroom every day who know best what success looks like and how to achieve it.
 
That’s why I think this roundtable is an excellent opportunity for this distinguished panel, representing a wide variety of perspectives, to give us some insight.
 
I am pretty sure that very few teachers or school leaders would advise us to judge educators simply based on a numerical test score. That isn’t fair to teachers, and, worse, it isn’t fair to students whose progress cannot be adequately measured by a single number.
 
I’m also pretty sure that very few teachers or school leaders would tell us that they have way too much in the way of resources to help them meet the high standards we set.
 
If we want excellent schools—and more than want them, I would argue we desperately need them to compete in the 21st-century economy—we have to provide educators not only with the funding, but with the training and development opportunities they need to improve and excel.
 
Teachers need the tools to succeed, the trust to deploy them as they see fit, and the time to show that they can get results.
 
That’s not an argument against accountability. That’s an argument for the kind of accountability that encourages success instead of simply punishing shortcomings. And it’s the way we’re going to fulfill the goal of having a great teacher in every classroom.
 
I know this is a roundtable and not a lecture, so I’m going to stop talking and listen. I look forward to your thoughts and to our discussion today.
