Senator Chris Dodd (D-CT) today paid tribute on the Senate floor to his friend and colleague Senator Robert C. Byrd (D-WV), who passed away this morning at the age of 92.
 
Below are Dodd’s remarks, as prepared for delivery.

“Mr. President, I rise today to mark the passing and celebrate the prolific life of Robert C. Byrd.

Robert Byrd loved three things above all others: his wife Erma, the state of West Virginia, and this Senate.

And each loved him back.

Our sadness at his passing is tempered by our joy that he now joins his beloved Erma.  

What a love story.  They met in grade school.  And they married in 1937, well before I was born.  

They spent nearly 70 years on an incredible journey together, and even after her passing a few years ago, his love for her was apparent in everything he did.

In 1946, when Robert Byrd first ran for office, West Virginia ranked at the bottom in nearly every economic indicator.  It was a bleak landscape pockmarked by coal fields and populated by hard-working people from hard-scrabble backgrounds.

And then a grocer from the town of Sophia arrived on the scene, asking his neighbors for their votes in his race for the West Virginia House of Delegates.

As the Washington Post noted in its obituary this morning, Robert Byrd met nearly every person in his district, campaigning alone, talking about the issues and, when all else failed, wowing potential voters with his fiddle prowess.

He won that election, as he would win every election in which he ever ran.  The people of West Virginia never could say no to Robert Byrd.

And he never could say no to them.  As a state legislator, as a Congressman, and as a Senator, he fought for West Virginians at every turn.

If you travel the state today, you’ll see his name on schools, bridges, and highway signs.

You’ll perceive his influence when you see the government buildings and research laboratories he brought to West Virginia – investments that contributed both to the state and national economy.

But don’t just look for his name on the sides of buildings.  Listen for it in the appreciative words of his constituents – his extended family.

No state has ever had such a deep appreciation for the Senate Appropriations Committee – because no state has ever had such an effective appropriator.

Robert Byrd came to Congress with my father in 1952, and to the Senate with my father in 1958.  

In the summer of 1961, I was a Senate page, sitting on the Senate floor. I still remember the eloquent speeches of the freshman Senator from West Virginia.

It is incredible to imagine that he was once a freshman.  Even then, he had the same gentlemanly manner, the same knack for triumphant oratory, the same respect for the rules and traditions of this body.

But he soon became a fixture, and a mentor for new Senators.  

I expect that, over the next few days, many Senators will take this floor with Constitutions in their pockets – Constitutions they received from Robert Byrd along with a stern but kind lecture in Senate protocol. I have mine right here – tattered, thread-bare after about 25 years.

For the last quarter century, I’ve occupied some prime real estate here in the Senate – the desk next to his.  Like all of us, I’ve been awed by his deep knowledge of this institution and his deeper commitment to preserving its place in our legislative system.

So, in many ways, Robert Byrd’s story is one of constancy, of preservation, of tradition.  You could define his life by longevity – his 69 years of marriage, his 52 years of service in the Senate, his 64 years in public office.

But he wouldn’t have wanted it that way.  This country has changed over the many years in which Robert Byrd helped to lead it.  And he has grown and changed with it.

His story parallels the American story, the story of a nation on a long and difficult journey.

He would not have wanted us to forget about the positions and affiliations that marked the early part of his life and career.

And he did not.  We should learn from his mistakes – as he did -  draw inspiration from his journey, and credit him for being willing to admit wrong and embrace right.

Because, like America, Robert Byrd grew wiser as he grew older.  

And so we can remember him not only as a tremendously effective legislator, not only as a powerful speaker, not only as a parliamentary wizard, but also as a man who fought for equality with the true urgency of a convert.

Here was a man unafraid of reflection, a man who voted to make Martin Luther King’s birthday a federal holiday because, as he put it, “I’m the only one who must vote for this bill.”

Here was a man unafraid of progress, a man who, in one of his final acts as a Senator, voted to overturn “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell.”

Here was a man unafraid of conscience, a man who, as the guns of war prepared to fire in 2003, delivered one of history’s most courageous and memorable pleas for peace.

So let us not remember Robert Byrd for how much stayed the same throughout his life.

Let us remember him for how the years changed him, and how he changed America for the better for so many years.

Let us remember him as West Virginia’s greatest champion, the Senate’s gentlemanly scholar, Erma’s husband, and, above all, our true friend.

I yield the floor.
