Senator Chris Dodd (D-CT) introduced and expressed his strong support for Susan Carney today at her nomination hearing in front of the Senate Judiciary Committee.  Carney was nominated by President Obama to serve on the Second Circuit Court of Appeals.

“Throughout her career Susan has developed a professional versatility and breadth of legal knowledge well-suited to service on the Second Circuit Court of Appeals,” said Dodd. “And perhaps even more importantly, I believe she has exhibited the kind of temperament and unflinching respect for the rule of law that are absolutely critical components of serving on any federal court.”

Susan Laura Carney has served as Deputy General Counsel at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut, since 2001. She has provided legal counsel to Yale for 12 years, since 1998, and worked as Acting General Counsel of Yale in 2008.  She graduated from Harvard Law School magna cum laude in 1977 and went on to clerk for Judge Levin H. Campbell of the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in Boston. Prior to her time at Yale University, Susan had a distinguished career as an attorney in private practice and as Associate General Counsel for the Peace Corps.

Dodd’s remarks, as prepared for delivery, are below:

SENATOR CHRISTOPHER J. DODD
INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT FOR SUSAN L. CARNEY
NOMINEE FOR SECOND CIRCUIT COURT OF APPEALS
SENATE COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
SEPTEMBER 15, 2010

Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Sessions, and members of the Committee, thank you for convening today’s hearing to consider pending federal judicial nominations. I appreciate being given the opportunity to introduce Susan Carney, an extremely well-respected member of Connecticut’s legal community, who was nominated by President Obama in May to serve on the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.

I would also like to take this opportunity to introduce her husband of 31 years, Lincoln Caplan; her daughter, Molly Sarah Caplan, a junior at Columbia University; and her mother, Mrs. Cleo Carney, a veteran of the United States Navy; as well as the many other members of her family who have joined her at today’s hearing.

The Senate’s constitutionally-mandated duty to provide advice and consent on nominees to the federal bench is, in my view, one of this body’s most important functions. It is our obligation as Senators to carefully examine judicial nominees and determine for ourselves whether they are qualified for the positions they seek.

And while I realize that my colleagues may approach this process with different criteria, I firmly believe that Susan Carney is, by any measure, eminently qualified to serve as a judge on the Second Circuit.

Since her graduation from Harvard Law School in 1977, Susan has enjoyed a diverse and illustrious legal career that has taken her from government service, to private practice, to the halls of one of the most prestigious educational and research institutions in the world. 

Having graduated magna cum laude, Susan clerked for Judge Levin H. Campbell on the First Circuit Court of Appeals. Following a distinguished career in the private sector, where she represented large non-profit organizations on behalf of a variety of firms in Washington, DC, Los Angeles, and Boston, Susan was hired as Associate General Counsel for the Peace Corps in 1996. After two years performing important legal work for that agency, Susan joined the Office of General Counsel at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut in 1998.

Since 2001, Susan has served as Yale’s Deputy General Counsel, the second highest-ranking legal position at the university. In this capacity, Susan has worked on a broad array of legal matters, from international affiliations and transactions, to research, intellectual property, technology transfer, and compliance issues. 

Throughout her career Susan has developed a professional versatility and breadth of legal knowledge well-suited to service on the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. 

And perhaps even more importantly, I believe she has exhibited the kind of temperament and unflinching respect for the rule of law that are absolutely critical components of serving on any federal court.

Last fall, before she was nominated by President Obama, I had the opportunity to meet Susan in my state office in Hartford. Among the many topics that came up during our lengthy discussion was my father’s service at Nuremburg, and how the Nuremburg trials are a powerful example of our nation’s commitment to the rule of law. During that meeting, Susan reiterated her commitment to that ideal, and I have no doubt that, if confirmed, that commitment to the rule of law will define her service as a federal judge.     

Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Sessions, I am certain that, during the course of this afternoon’s hearing, Susan’s excellent qualifications will be closely and fairly scrutinized. 

And it is my hope that, following the Committee’s consideration, the full Senate will be able to move forward expeditiously in confirming this superb nominee.

Thank you.
