WASHINGTON, D.C. - Today, after additional improperly marked graves at Arlington National Cemetery were brought to light by The Washington Post, U.S. Senator Claire McCaskill plans to go to the Senate floor and ask the Senate to pass legislation that she has introduced to address problems at Arlington The legislation will help the new leadership at the cemetery structure a plan to identify and remedy errors like the ones uncovered recently. The legislation follows up on a hearing McCaskill chaired in July in her Subcommittee on Contracting Oversight to examine the problem of unmarked or improperly marked gravesites and is part of her ongoing commitment to ensure the Army investigates and resolves any identified problems. McCaskill introduced the bill in October with Senators Scott Brown (R-MA), Joseph Lieberman (I-CT), Susan Collins (R-ME), and Richard Burr (R-NC).

"Today's news that they've discovered eight improperly marked urns is heartbreaking. I hurt for all the families involved, but this gives me new resolve to pass legislation to force Arlington to get their act together," McCaskill said.

Last month, the Army launched a criminal investigation into eight sets of unknown remains found in a grave marked unknown. However, unlike previous problems which were likely caused by human error, the Army believes these discoveries may not have been a mistake.

Many of the previous problems at Arlington National Cemetery resulted from a failed effort to automate how the cemetery tracks burial records and manages burial operations. Despite spending between $5 and $8 million on multiple IT contracts over seven years, the cemetery's complex records remain in paper form and prone to human errors. The documents and information that were presented at the July hearing suggest that thousands of graves may be unmarked, improperly marked, or mislabeled on the cemetery's maps.

Following a June 2010 U.S. Army Inspector General (IG) report that found many of the problems at Arlington National Cemetery, the Secretary of the Army established a new organizational structure at the cemetery and created a new leadership position that reports directly to the secretary. A senior official from the Department of Veterans Affairs, which successfully manages over 130 veterans cemeteries nationwide, is also helping the Army to sort out the problems and reorganize the oversight and management systems at Arlington National Cemetery.

Today's legislation will codify the new organizational structure and ensure that the management at Arlington is accountable to Congress.

Specifically, the legislation will:

Require the Secretary of the Army to report to Congress on the Cemetery's ability to verify the identity, location and burial records for every gravesite at Arlington National Cemetery and the plans to remedy any errors found.

Require the Secretary of the Army to report to Congress on the progress at Arlington on changing the management and oversight structure at Arlington National Cemetery, including contract management and practices for providing information and outreach to families of individuals buried at Arlington.

Require the Government Accountability Office to oversee and report to Congress on the management and oversight of contracts at Arlington National Cemetery, including oversight of:

All contracts for the automation of burial operations

Cemetery contract management and coordination with Army contracting agencies

Any corrective action taken to address the IG report's findings

The Cemetery's compliance with directives from the Secretary of the Army and recommendations from the Army National Cemeteries Advisory Commission

Cemetery practices for providing information and outreach to families of individuals buried at Arlington

Feasibility and advisability of transferring the control of Arlington National Cemetery and the Soldiers' and Airmen's Home National Cemetery to the Department of Veterans Affairs, including the feasibility and advisability of sharing responsibility between the two agencies.
