WASHINGTON, D.C. - U.S. Senator Claire McCaskill today applauded the passage of the Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010 (S. 3447), a bill that would expand educational benefits for those in the military and veterans who have served in the Armed Forces since September 11, 2001.

The bill, introduced by Senator Daniel Akaka (D-HI) and co-sponsored by McCaskill, will increase and improve the scope of educational assistance for veterans and provide additional benefits to all members of the military who have served on active duty since September 11. It builds off the landmark post-9/11 G.I. Bill of 2008, also cosponsored by McCaskill, which has enabled thousands of veterans and their families to take advantage of a wide range of educational programs, including providing post-9/11 veterans the opportunity to attend college at no cost with assistance for housing, books and other expenses.

"I was proud to support the Veterans Educational Assistance Act because it makes important improvements and enhancements to the Post-9/11 GI Bill based on the direct input of veterans and service members who are pursuing their education under the landmark bill," U.S. Senator Claire McCaskill said. "Much like the original GI Bill, which offered educational support to troops like my dad when they returned home from World War II, the Veterans Educational Assistance Act is an investment in our troops and an investment in our nation."

As passed by the Senate, this bill will would:

 Streamline educational benefits for veterans who have served on active duty since September 11, 2001

 Expand benefits to include on-job and vocational training

 Qualify active duty service members and their families for an annual book allowance

 Expand eligibility for National Guard and Reserve service members called to respond to national emergencies or full-time active duty

This bill now moves to the House of Representatives for consideration.

For more information on the Post-9/11 GI Bill, please visit http://www.gibill.va.gov.
