WASHINGTON, D.C. - Today, U.S. Senators Claire McCaskill and Kit Bond announce the unanimous passage of legislation that pays tribute to a Missouri man who displayed extraordinary generosity and compassion as a leading philanthropist in the St. Louis area. The legislation, sponsored by McCaskill and Bond in the Senate and Representative Wm. Lacy Clay in the House of Representatives, designates the St. Louis post office located at 111 North 6th Street as the ‘Earl Wilson, Jr. Post Office.'

"I'm pleased my colleagues and I were able to come together to honor a man who spent his life selflessly serving the African-American community in St. Louis. This is a small but fitting tribute for a man who helped numerous young men and women, who may not have otherwise been able to afford it, continue with their education," said Senator McCaskill.

"The naming of this post office is but a small way to honor the many contributions Earl Wilson, Jr. made to the St. Louis community," said Senator Bond."A countless number of St. Louisans have benefited from Earl's generosity and lifetime of service and I'm pleased to join Senator McCaskill and Congressman Clay in paying tribute to him today."

"Earl Wilson, Jr.'s lifetime of achievement in the corporate world, as the founder of the St. Louis Gateway Classic Foundation, as a proud veteran of the U.S. Army, as a father, husband and friend to so many...will live forever. He selflessly invested his immense talents and boundless energy to building up his community and his country. I thank Senator McCaskill and Senator Bond for joining me to honor a great American, Earl Wilson, Jr.,"said Congressman Clay.

Following last week's unanimous passage by the House of Representatives, McCaskill and Bond sent joint letters to the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Joseph Lieberman (I-CT) and Ranking Member Susan Collins (R-ME), outlining Wilson's contributions to St. Louis, and asking for their support in the swift passage of this legislation.

Most notably, Wilson founded the St. Louis Gateway Classic Sports Foundation, a non-profit organization that grants college scholarships to African-American youth throughout the greater St. Louis area. In 2000, Wilson was named by President Bill Clinton to the President's Board of Advisors on Historically Black Colleges and Universities where he worked to improve and expand access to higher education for generations of students.
