Hawaii will receive $38,196,841 to pay for preliminary engineering for the Honolulu rail-transit project, buy new buses, and fund improvements to Kaunakakai small boat harbor, Senator Daniel K. Inouye and Senator Daniel K. Akaka announced today.

The bulk of the money, $34,990,000, will go to the City and County of Honolulu to fund the preliminary engineering of the 20-mile elevated rail line that will connect West Oahu with downtown Honolulu and Ala Moana Center. 
Honolulu also receives $1,548,000 to buy new buses and para-transit buses as part of an effort to maintain and refurbish their current fleet of 531 vehicles.

Maui County will receive $1,658,541 to pay for improvements to the Kaunakakai small boat harbor on Molokai.  The harbor is an integral part of the Molokai economy and is both a commercial and a recreational harbor.

It has 29 boat slips and mooring spaces, two docks, a pier, a 12 foot wide boat launching ramp, restrooms and a harbor office.

"The safe and timely transport of our residents and visitors is critical to maintaining a healthy economy.  These funds will help pay for much needed acquisitions, improvements and innovations that will help alleviate the daily gridlock on Oahu’s roadways and ensure that the people of Molokai receive the goods and services they require,” said Senator Inouye.  “The rail transit project will create jobs and help Hawaii decrease its dependence on imported oil by providing an affordable alternative to driving.  I remain committed to this project and will continue to do everything I can at the federal level to fund the work and ensure its timely completion.”

“This $35 million in federal funding will help get the rail project moving, create jobs on Oahu, and provide an immediate boost to Hawaii’s economy,” said Senator Akaka.  “It is time to move forward on rail to finally give Oahu residents a new alternative to sitting in some of the worst traffic in the nation.  Rail, along with improved bus service, will reduce pollution and save riders money on car maintenance, gas, parking, and more.  I am also pleased funds will be provided for much needed improvements to the Kaunakakai boat harbor, which is critical to the people of Molokai."
