Senator Daniel K. Inouye released the following statement today in response to the Republican ‘Pledge to America.’

“Today, the Republican Party released their ‘Pledge to America,’ a plan that purports to “…put us on a path to balance the budget and pay down the debt.” 

“As part of their pledge, the Republicans promise to cut discretionary spending next year by $100 billion.  But at the same time, they also promise to renew the tax cuts passed under former President Bush, including those for the wealthiest Americans, at a cost of four trillion dollars.” 

“In terms of reducing the deficit, this makes no sense at all.  Clearly, $100 billion in spending cuts does not make up for the four trillion dollars in lost revenue.  This is the same playbook Republicans employed when President Bush turned surpluses into huge deficits. At that time, Republicans promised us that we could afford to cut taxes and continue to pay down the national debt.  And as we all know, that didn’t happen.” 

“Our nation is still struggling to emerge from the worst recession since the Great Depression, and the Republican response is to return immediately to the failed policies of the past.  What is the sense in that?  If Republicans want to offer four trillion dollars in tax cuts, let them also offer four trillion dollars in spending cuts to fully offset the cost. That is the honest way to balance the budget.  Those who do not remember history may be doomed to repeat it, but those who so easily mislead the American people just six weeks ahead of an election should be held to account for their false promises.”

“In my home state of Hawaii I cannot help but note that Congressman Charles Djou is once again championing the Republican Party line rather than looking for real solutions to help control government spending while providing for Hawaii’s working families.  Unfortunately, Congressman Djou and his Republican colleagues would rather return Hawaii’s share of job creating stimulus funds and repeal the healthcare reform bill and all of its Hawaii incentives as part of a vague plan to ‘reclaim the government for the people.’ Congressmen Djou has not offered specific solutions or funding formulas to support extending the Bush era tax cuts while also paying for healthcare, education and other essential government services.  Like the rest of the nation, Hawaii is struggling to emerge from the global recession and our residents need leaders who provide specific plans rooted in economic reality rather than political grandstanding and abstract ideas.”
