Honolulu will receive $2,383,424 to help plan and build retail and residential development along the city’s rail transit line, Senator Daniel K. Inouye, Mayor Peter Carlisle and City Council Chair Todd K. Apo announced today.The money comes through a grant from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

The money will help city engineers plan for and organize the residential and commercial development around the 20-mile elevated rail line that will connect West O`ahu with downtown Honolulu and Ala Moana Center.

 
Mayor Carlisle, Chair Apo and City Council member J. Ikaika Anderson recently returned from meetings in Washington D.C. with Federal Transit Administration Administrator Peter M. Rogoff and other key stakeholders.

"The rail transit project will provide long awaited relief for thousands of Oahu residents who suffer through the daily gridlock that afflicts commuters heading in and out of town from the West side of the island.  These funds will help city engineers plan the compact communities that will rise around the rail line,” said Senator Inouye.  “The rail transit project will create jobs and help Hawaii decrease its dependence on imported oil by providing an affordable alternative to driving.  I remain committed to this project and will continue to do everything I can at the federal level to fund the work and ensure its timely completion.”


“The purpose of the recent trip to Washington D.C. was to emphasize Honolulu’s commitment to rail and the desire to get the rail project going so we can get our people back to work as soon as possible.  The City and County of Honolulu is grateful for this $2,383,424 federal grant, which will greatly assist Honolulu in planning transit oriented development, creating residential and commercial communities and enhancing the overall rail project.  We thank Senator Inouye, HUD and the Federal Transit Administration for their leadership and continued support,”  said Honolulu Mayor Peter Carlisle.

“We truly appreciate the continued federal support for our rail project, and in this case the added benefits that the transportation project brings.  Transit oriented development and its affordable housing elements are vital pieces of the long term benefit package being created by our transit project.  This shows a broader support for our efforts to improve life in Honolulu. On behalf of the Council, I thank Senator Inouye and HUD for their continued support and assistance for our local economy and housing needs,” said Council Chair Apo.
