A 300,000 square foot Pacific Regional Center for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration(NOAA) on Ford Island that will house more than 400 employees and bring NOAA’s research, forecasting, and enforcement operations under one roof will enter the final phase of construction after receiving a $131.9 million federal grant, Senator Daniel K. Inouye announced today.

 

“The construction of the Pacific Regional Center will create approximately 3,000 jobs in Hawaii, real opportunities for businesses and working families struggling to find opportunities during these difficult economic times,” said Senator Daniel K. Inouye. “The construction of this center is a significant investment in Hawaii and the Pacific Region.  It will allow NOAA immediate access to the research and expertise generated by their assets in the region meaning services will no longer be delivered by NOAA offices reviewing information gathered from afar.  I would like to laud the efforts of everyone involved in this project for recognizing Hawaii’s importance as a research and operational hub.”

 

The $323 millionfacility will combine lab and office space in two renovated World War II-era aircraft hangars and a new structure that is under construction.  NOAA is working with the U.S. Navy to modernize and consolidate NOAA’s programs supporting management of coastal and marine resources and weather, tsunami, and climate prediction in the Pacific.

 

The complex is scheduled to open in 2013.  The $131.9 million came through a grant funded by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.

 

Senator Inouye recognized the need for the center and began appropriating money and federal resources for the regional hub seven years ago.  

 

Hawaii, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Wake Islands, and Palmyra Atoll, make up 50% of the U.S. Exclusive Economic Zone or an area larger than the continental United States.

 

Once completed, the Pacific Regional Center will be home to:

        National Marine Fisheries: Pacific Islands Regional Office; Pacific Islands Fisheries Science Center and Honolulu Lab; Office of Law Enforcement

        National Weather Service: Pacific Region Headquarters; International Tsunami Information Center; Honolulu Electronics and Technical Support Unit; Pacific Tsunami Warning Center

        National Ocean Service: Pacific Regional Offices for National Marine Sanctuary Program; Papahanaumokuakea Marine National Monument; Hawaii Humpback Whale National Marine Sanctuary; Pacific Services Center

        NOAA Marine Aviation Operations: Marine Operations Center-Pacific

        NOAA Office of General Counsel

        Office of Oceanic & Atmospheric Research

        Office of Public Affairs

 

 NOAA’s mission is to understand and predict changes in the Earth's environment, from the depths of the ocean to the surface of the sun, and to conserve and manage our coastal and marine resources. Visit us at http://www.noaa.gov or on Facebook at http://www.facebook.com/usnoaagov.
