More than $90 million in federal stimulus funds are working to create jobs and enhance and innovate Hawaii’s use of clean, renewable sources of energy, Senators Daniel K. Inouye and Daniel K. Akaka announced today.

The $90.2 million at work in Hawaii comes from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA).  Hawaii has unique access to substantial natural resources, including solar, biomass , geothermal, and hydroelectric power.

The American Recovery & Reinvestment Act is making a meaningful down payment on the nation's energy and environmental future.  The ARRA investments in Hawaii are supporting a broad range of clean energy projects, from energy efficiency and the smart grid to wind power and biofuels.

Through these investments, Hawaii's businesses, universities, non-profits, and local governments are creating quality jobs today and positioning Hawaii to play an important role in the new energy economy of the future.

“These funds will not only help fortify our clean energy sector but they will help put people to work while establishing our state as a major player in the green economy.  For too long Hawaii has been dependent on imported fossil fuel and these funds are critical to enhancing our energy self-sufficiency,” said Senator Inouye.

“Energy projects funded through the Recovery Act are helping to keep people working in Hawaii while expanding energy efficiency and clean energy production.  This will mean greater self-sufficiency and a stronger economy tomorrow,” said Senator Akaka.

The $90 million investment in Hawaii includes:
 $25.9 million through the State Energy Program.

 $4 million through the Weatherization Assistance Program, including $1.6 million to the Hawaii Office of Community Service (OCS) to install energy efficient devices in more than 650 homes across the state over the next three years.
OCS will administer the program through two local community organizations: Honolulu Community Action Program (Honolulu)
Maui Economic Opportunity, Inc. (Big Island, Kauai and Maui)

 $15 million from the Energy Efficiency and Conversation Block program which will allow State Energy Office of Hawaii ($9,593,500)
Honolulu ($3.9 million)
Big Island ($737,800)
Maui ($605,300)
Kauai ($267,900)

 $750,000 from the U.S. Department of Energy to the Hawaiian Electric Company for the development of wind power initiatives through the Hawaii Utility Integration Initiative.

 $5.3 million to Hawaii Electric Company to upgrade its electrical grid as part the Smart Grid technology program. These funds will be used as part of HECO’s effort to reduce outage times, expand the energy efficient skill sets of its employees and retain jobs.

 The availability of $1.23 million for a State-run rebate program for consumer purchases of new ENERGY STAR qualified home appliances

For a breakdown of ARRA clean energy investment in Hawaii, please visit:
http://www.energy.gov/recovery/hi.htm
