Community health centers that serve rural communities, low income families and the uninsured will receive $10,302,665 to modernize and expand facilities on Oahu and the Big Island, Senators Daniel K. Inouye and Daniel K. Akaka announced today.

The Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center, which oversees five facilities in Waianae, Kapolei and Waipahu, will receive $7,929,695. The Hilo Bay Clinic Inc., which manages six clinics in Hilo, Pahoa, Naalehu and Keaau, will receive $2,372,970.

The money will be used for construction and renovation and will help the clinics expand access to quality health care.  The money will create jobs in Hawaii’s construction and healthcare sectors.
 
“These funds will help increase access to affordable health care for those in our community who struggle to see medical professionals,” said Senator Inouye.  “No member of our community should be denied access to quality health care because they cannot pay for it or they live in a rural area of Hawaii.  The mission of the community health care centers is to make sure that anyone needing medical attention receives it in a timely fashion and we in government must do all we can to support such a benevolent endeavor.”

“These federal resources will help two of our vital community health centers address urgent infrastructure needs and create jobs as they continue serving residents in Leeward Oahu and East Hawaii,” said Senator Akaka.
Community Health Centers (CHCs), also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs), are non-profit corporations that provide comprehensive, high quality, cost-effective care to underserved segments of the population. 

There are 23 Community Health Centers in all four counties.

The money comes through a grant from U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).  The grant program for community health center construction and renovation was expanded under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 

For more information about community health centers in Hawaii, please visit http://www.hawaiipca.net/.
