I rise to pay tribute to Senator Ted Stevens, a great American.  

    Senator Stevens cared deeply for the people of Alaska, and all the people of the United States of America.  

    He dedicated his career to the security and well being of this country, from his early days as an Army Air Corps pilot in World War II where he served multiple deployments across several continents, through his long career here in the U.S. Senate, as the longest serving Republican in the history of this institution.  

    Ted Stevens was a brother and a dear friend.  We were ohana, family.  We worked together on so many issues to serve the needs of our non-contiguous states.  

    Senator Stevens knew well the unique challenges both Alaska and Hawaii face, as the newest states, furthest from the U.S. mainland.  

    Ted Stevens' love of Alaska is well known.  But many people do not know Ted was actually a great surfer, and he was a frequent visitor to Hawaii.  He loved to surf Kaimana Hila, Diamond Head, and Waikiki.  

    When his surfing days were over, he brought his favorite surfboard here to Washington and displayed it in his Senate office, alongside the many treasures from Alaska.  Ted loved Hawaiian music and song, and I enjoyed singing with him.  

    Ted Stevens was a friend of America's first people.  He constantly reminded the United States of its responsibility to its indigenous people in Alaska, Hawaii, and across the country. 

   While the people of Alaska will always remember him, visitors to our nation?s capitol will also be reminded of Ted Stevens? work.  Together we were successful in moving the 1965 model of the Statue of Freedom out of storage and into its prominent place today in the Capitol Visitor Center Emancipation Hall.  

    Ted Stevens brought strength and passion to the Senate for many decades.  He was a constant presence in this institution.  

    My wife Millie and I send our warm aloha and deepest condolences to Catherine and all of Ted's family.  I also want to extend my condolences to Senator Stevens' staff who worked tirelessly for him and for all of Alaska for so many years.

    Aloha, farewell to Senator Ted Stevens.
