I congratulate Mr. Dodaro on his nomination and welcome him to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.  As a strong supporter of the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), I am pleased President Obama has nominated an individual with Mr. Dodaro's extensive experience and credentials to be the next Comptroller General of the United States.  
    
Since becoming the Acting Comptroller General in March 2008, Mr. Dodaro has led GAO with integrity and dedication.  I am especially grateful that Mr. Dodaro has been able to oversee the production of hundreds of high-quality reports and Congressional statements, despite the significant expansion of GAO responsibilities mandated by the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act and the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.

Mr. Dodaro has devoted his entire career to serving at GAO, joining the agency as an entry-level auditor and progressing all the way to his current role as Acting Comptroller General.  This experience has given Mr. Dodaro a unique understanding of the operations and responsibilities of the agency, in addition to an appreciation for the agency's most important asset, its dedicated staff.  
      
I am pleased that GAO's interim human capital strategic plan continues the agency's commitment to investing in its workforce to improve performance, and I commend GAO for consistently being ranked second out of all large Federal agencies on the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places to Work survey.  
      
I am also encouraged that Mr. Dodaro appears to have developed a positive, constructive working relationship between GAO and the GAO Employees Organization, and I congratulate all parties on reaching a tentative agreement on the agency's first-ever comprehensive master collective bargaining agreement.       
      
As Chairman of the Subcommittee on Oversight of Government Management, I know that effective management practices are necessary to safeguarding taxpayer dollars and achieving government missions.  I have worked closely with GAO to address significant management challenges of the Federal Government, notably working to reform programs on GAO's high-risk list, such as the security clearance process.  I look forward to continuing this important work together as we enter the 112th Congress.    
    
We must also continue to improve the performance of the Federal Government, as agencies seek to achieve better outcomes at lower costs.  Since the enactment of the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) of 1993, GAO has conducted extensive examinations of its implementation.  From these studies, several long-standing recommendations have emerged, including the need for better cross-cutting strategic planning, enhanced training on how to conduct rigorous program evaluations, and improved Congressional consultation to inform funding and authorization decisions.  I fully support these GAO recommendations, which is why I joined with Senators Carper, Warner, Lieberman, Collins, and Voinovich, in introducing the GPRA Modernization Act of 2010, which seeks to implement these recommendations to enhance and refine the original Results Act.     

I have long been a champion of greater oversight of all critical government operations.  Earlier this Congress, I introduced legislation, the Intelligence Community Audit Act, to reaffirm and clarify the Comptroller General's authority within the Intelligence Community.  I was pleased that the Intelligence Authorization Act directed the Director of National Intelligence to work with the Comptroller General to issue a written directive covering GAO's access to the Intelligence Community.  This is a critical step to ensuring that GAO and the Congress will be able to conduct critical oversight.    

Finally, I would like to express my deep appreciation for Mr. Dodaro's commitment to promoting greater financial literacy in the United States.  I strongly support initiatives that address the need to improve financial literacy efforts not only within the Federal Government, but across the entire Nation.  The Comptroller General is in a unique position to increase awareness of important, cross-cutting challenges, and I am encouraged that financial literacy will be an area of focus for Mr. Dodaro, if confirmed.         

The United States continues to face daunting challenges both at home and abroad.  Mr. Dodaro assumed his current leadership position during an incredibly difficult time in our Nation's history.  His strong performance over the past two years gives me confidence that if he is confirmed, GAO will continue to exemplify the agency's core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability.    

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
