     I am pleased to join Senators Carper, Warner, Collins, Lieberman, and Voinovich in introducing the GPRA Modernization Act of 2010.    
         
     As an original cosponsor of the Government Performance and Results Act of 1993, often referred to as GPRA or the Results Act, I believe the time has come to refine and enhance this landmark bill.  

     President Obama, in his inaugural address, observed:
The question we ask today is not whether our government is too big or too small, but whether it works.
     This question captures the essence of what the Results Act seeks to achieve.  While the original Results Act made significant progress in encouraging agencies to develop a results-oriented culture, it is time to modernize GPRA.  Several long-standing challenges hinder agency efforts to answer this critical question.  Our legislation is a bipartisan effort to empower agencies to overcome these challenges and better evaluate how to use taxpayer dollars in the most efficient and effective way possible.    

     Prior to 1993, Congress had never enacted a statutory framework for strategic planning, goal setting, or performance measurement.  According to the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), before GPRA, few agencies had results-oriented performance information to manage or make strategic policy decisions.  The Results Act was a bipartisan effort that succeeded in establishing a comprehensive and consistent statutory foundation of required agency strategic plans, annual performance plans, and annual performance reports.  GPRA is and must remain a cornerstone of the Federal Government's efforts to strengthen strategic planning across all agencies.  

     Lessons learned from nearly two decades worth of experience implementing the Results Act, informed by numerous GAO reports and recommendations; confirm the need to strengthen the statutory framework established by GPRA.   

     The legislation we offer today draws on this experience, applying lessons learned to amend GPRA to address the limitations identified by GAO and other observers.  I will highlight a few of the important provisions in this bill.  

     Our bill requires the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to develop a Federal Government Performance Plan and to coordinate with agencies to develop Federal Government priority goals for management and policy issues that cut across agencies.  This provision addresses a long-standing GAO recommendation that the Federal Government develop a government-wide performance plan to provide OMB, agencies, and Congress, with a structured framework for addressing crosscutting policy initiatives and program efforts.  

     This legislation also strengthens the congressional consultation provisions to require agencies consult with Congress when developing strategic plans and identifying priority goals.  GAO has found that regular consultation with Congress about the content and format of strategic and performance plans is critical to ensure that both the Executive and Legislative Branches are engaged in improving government performance.  Full congressional buy-in is a key element to building a sustainable performance management framework.  

     Our legislative proposal also addresses performance management skills and competencies, which GAO has identified as a critical factor in determining an agency's success in utilizing performance management systems.  A 2007 GAO survey of Federal managers found nearly half reported not receiving training that would assist in utilizing performance information.  Our bill addresses this training deficit by requiring the Director of the Office of Personnel Management to identify key performance management skills and competencies and incorporate them into relevant position classifications and training curricula.      
       
     Congress has a responsibility to promote effective performance management to enable Federal agencies to spend taxpayer dollars wisely, while carrying out critical missions.  The GPRA Modernization Act is an important step towards accomplishing this goal, and I urge my colleagues to support this legislation.    
