(Washington, D.C.) – U.S. Sen. David Vitter today announced his hold on the nomination of Dr. Scott Doney to be Chief Scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. In a letter to President Obama, Vitter outlined his concerns with confirming Doney, citing the administration’s lack of scientific integrity regarding the recent offshore drilling moratorium and the continuing de facto moratorium.


The text of the letter follows: 

December 9, 2010 
The Honorable Barack Obama 
President 
The White House 
1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20500 

Dear Mr. President: 

This letter is to notify you of my intention to force a U.S. Senate floor “hold” of the nomination of Dr. Scott Doney to be Chief Scientist, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce. Specifically, I am uncomfortable confirming a high-level science advisor within your administration while there remain significant outstanding concerns over scientific integrity at federal agencies and the White House, including with regard to the recent drilling moratorium and the ongoing bottleneck in permitting, which I would characterize as a continuing de facto moratorium. 

I am eager to work with your administration constructively to resolve this. Specifically, I would request two (2) things. First, I think it is important and directly related to scientific integrity within your administration to have a full hearing on the Department of Interior IG Report on the Federal Moratorium on Deepwater Drilling, dated November 8, 2010. It is my intention that a full investigative hearing be held in the Senate Small Business Committee and that your administration provides the following witnesses (as identified in the IG report) to testify under oath: 

1. Carol Browner, Assistant to the President for Energy and Climate Change. 
2. Steve Black, Counselor to Interior Secretary Salazar. 

Second, I would like a full and satisfactory written response to my letter dated November 21, 2010, to Secretary Salazar regarding the continuing de facto drilling moratorium. I have provided a copy of that letter for your reference. 

Louisianians are distraught by your administration’s disregard for scientific integrity, the health of the U.S. economy, and domestic energy production. We are losing jobs, economic activity, revenue to the federal treasury, and energy independence. We must change this dead-end path. 

I look forward to working with your administration constructively on this. 
