WASHINGTON -- The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office will open the first satellite office in its history in Detroit, tapping into Michigan’s deep engineering expertise, Sens. Carl Levin and Debbie Stabenow and Rep. John Dingell announced Thursday.
 
The first-of-its-kind regional office will help speed the processing of patent applications, helping Michigan companies and inventors market their innovations. The office is expected to initially employ about 100 engineers, along with a smaller number of support and administrative personnel.
 
“This is a banner day for Michigan, and the congressional delegation, Gov. Granholm’s office, U-M and others have worked hard to make it happen,” said Levin, D-Mich. “Michigan’s selection for the first regional satellite patent office speaks to the wealth of engineering talent and innovation in our state. There was plenty of competition, from more than a dozen cities across the country, and this choice shows just how much respect there is nationally for the important and ground-breaking work that happens every day in Michigan.”
 
“With Michigan being home to many innovative companies and research partnerships, such as the University Research Corridor, it makes perfect sense for the U.S. Patent Office to open its first satellite facility in Detroit.  Not only does this create jobs, but it also speeds up the patent process for our companies.  Our state is third in the nation in clean energy patents, and it is also home to groundbreaking research in areas such as agriculture, batteries, and autos,” said Stabenow , D-Mich.
 
“I am very pleased with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office’s choice of Detroit for its new satellite office.  Michigan’s surplus of engineering and technical talent, coupled with the numerous outstanding research institutions nearby like University of Michigan and Wayne State University, and the small, innovative firms looking to develop the next best product makes certain that this will be a win-win for the PTO and Southeast Michigan,”  said Dingell, D-Dearborn.
 
In addition to the immediate employment boost as the office begins hiring, it could spur indirect employment gains in several ways. And it will have immediate benefits for the University of Michigan and other educational institutions in the state.
 
“The opening of a satellite office for the PTO in Detroit will have enormous benefits for the region, and of course, also for the University of Michigan,” said Stephen Forrest, U-M’s Vice President for Research.  “The ability to do patent business at an office in Detroit will be a boon to the many educational institutions and knowledge-based industries in the larger region.  We thank our Michigan delegation and Governor Granholm in consultation with UM and local industry for making this important move possible.”
