 U.S. Senator Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) today issued the following statement on blocked efforts to offer a compromise amendment to phase out the use of bisphenol A (BPA) in baby bottles and sippy cups.

          Following is Senator Feinstein's statement:

"Unfortunately, the compromise agreement on a BPA amendment to the food safety bill has been blocked.  Last evening, an agreement between myself and Senator Enzi was reached, which would have:

Banned the use of BPA in baby bottles and sippy cups (largely because infants and children are the most vulnerable to the harmful effects of BPA), 
Required the FDA to issue a revised safety assessment on BPA by December 1, 2012; and
Included a savings clause to allow states to enact their own legislation.
I thank Ranking Member Enzi for his agreement.  Unfortunately it has become clear that the American Chemistry Council (ACC) has blocked and obstructed the agreement from being added to the Food Safety Bill currently on the floor.  Therefore, I cannot carry out the agreement that was reached.

I regret that the ACC puts the sale of chemicals above the safety of infants and children. 

This was a small step forward – a simple move to ban BPA in baby bottles and sippy cups.  A simple move to protect children.  All it did was ban BPA in baby bottles and sippy cups until the FDA safety assessment count be revised.

There is no benefit from having this harmful chemical in baby bottles and sippy cups for infants. I will not cease in my efforts to remove BPA from products where it can harm human health, and I urge consumers to vote with their pocketbooks by refusing to purchase products that contain BPA. This is especially important when it comes to buying products that will be used by infants or children.

However, I am pleased that seven states have taken initiative to phase out or ban BPA.  I also commend the manufacturers and retailers who have wisely begun to phase out BPA from children’s products and search for alternatives.  At least 14 major manufacturers either offer some BPA-free alternatives for baby bottles and sippy cups, or completely ban its use. 

What I have learned from this experience is that compromise is not possible on this issue. I very much regret that the chemical industry puts a higher priority on selling chemicals than on the health of infants."
