Thank you all for joining us today.

I would like to say what a pleasure it is be with my friend and colleague Senator McCain

For those of you who believe that Democrats and Republicans simply can’t find common ground on the challenges that confront us, our presence here today is proof that that is simply not so, so John it is great working with you once again.

Our gathering today is very timely, coming one day after the President announced that he is going to be calling for a three year freeze on discretionary spending in his State of the Union address tomorrow.

Senator McCain and I are here to say that Congress must do its part. Business as usual for the Congress simply is not good enough. We can no longer afford to spend money we do not have. That is common ground that Democrats and Republicans are now beginning to agree upon. But I think all of you have observed the budget process in Congress long enough, we have to keep the heat on to get the job done.

Secondly, our presence here today is very important, subsequently important because if we do not control this rising tide of red ink, we will see higher interest rates, higher inflation, and a lower standard of living and economic growth for our people. This is not the future that we want. We have an alternative here, a chance here, to chart a better future for both ourselves and for our children.

It is equally important, and I know Senator McCain agrees with this, across Arizona or across Indiana, I have not detected a level of anger and cynicism about the federal government in my lifetime, as high as it is today. People are asking themselves, “We have to tighten our belts, we have to make hard decisions. Why can’t the government do the same?” They ask “Is it only the recipients of federal largess that are entitled to annual increases? What about us who are paying the bills?” We have to stand with those who are paying the bills and show that the government can discipline itself and make the difficult decisions just as families and business have to do each and every day. And in so doing perhaps begin the process of rehabilitating the reputation of the government in the minds of the people.

Senator McCain and I are pleased to be here today to introduce this bipartisan legislation, but we are still in the drafting phase. That means we are still working on the precise language, so for those of who follow the arcane budget process on a daily basis, we are going to have additional specifics when we introduce the bill later this week. At that time we will begin to reach out to other members about signing onto our proposal.

But here is an overview of the basic elements of what we’re working on as part of the Bayh-McCain Fiscal Freeze Act of 2010.

First, as the bill’s name suggests, we propose placing a freeze on increases in non-security discretionary spending. The Bayh-McCain bill freezes discretionary spending at today’s levels and will allow for no more than inflationary increases until we have a balanced budget.

Second, we seek to codify long-term spending limits. Our bill creates new enforcement mechanisms to make sure Congress sticks to the fiscal blueprint that we establish for ourselves. No more weaseling out. We will never get out of debt without committing up front to live within our means. Congress will only solve our fiscal crisis by making common cause with Americans who have had to make these difficult decisions themselves during these difficult economic times.

Third, we will place a moratorium on all earmarks until our budget is balanced. The American people hate earmarks. The President wants us to stop with the earmarks. It’s time for our colleagues in Congress to get the message. We can no longer afford these special projects, however worthy they may be, during these difficult economic times.

Fourth, we need take a concrete step to protect Congress from itself by creating a statutory protection against a government shutdowns. The threat of a government shutdown is how bloated, earmark-filled appropriations bills are very often jammed down Congress’ throat at the last minute. Our plan would create an “automatic continuing resolution” that funds the government at current levels if Congress fails to act in time. No more false emergencies used as an excuse for increases in spending that we cannot afford.

Fifth, we propose a new deficit reduction trust fund. All too often, when Congress generates revenue for the purpose of deficit reduction it simply ends up spending it on something else.  This provision would create a new trust fund set-aside specifically for deficit reduction where those funds would be protected from members of Congress who want to get their hands on them for some other purpose. 

Sixth, we propose the adoption of a constitutional line-item veto that would give the President and future Presidents, the power to strike wasteful spending from appropriations bills. We have a strong belief that this can be done in a Constitutional manner and I would point out as a former governor, I think 46 or so state executives have this authority. It worked well at the state level to restrain spending; it would work equally well at the federal level to restrain spending.

Seventh, we propose creating a new 60-vote threshold for unauthorized earmarks that are air-dropped into conference reports when the public and the media aren’t watching. No more tricks. The American people want responsible, transparent government.  I know Senator McCain and Senator Feingold, another fiscal hawk, have worked on a similar provision. I whole-heartedly endorse it.

Finally, we think the budget resolution should be legally binding. Our current process allows appropriators to disregard the document created to keep us on budget. That’s a fundamental flaw in our budget process and one that we propose to correct.

There’s an old saying that you can’t spend what you don’t have. Unfortunately, Congress has been doing exactly that for too long. Senator McCain and I propose to change that starting today. John, it’s a pleasure working with you.
