Senator Klobuchar, Ranking Member Sessions, and other distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee – thank you for the opportunity today to introduce three outstanding Hoosiers who have been nominated to serve as United States District Judges.  I was proud to join with Senator Lugar to recommend these exemplary individuals to the White House, and I am confident that each will be an excellent addition to the federal bench.

Before I introduce these nominees, I would like to comment briefly on the state of the judicial confirmation process generally.  In my view, this process has too often been consumed by ideological conflict and partisan acrimony.  This is not, I believe, how the Framers intended us to exercise our responsibility to advise and consent.

 During the last Congress, I was proud to work with Senator Lugar to recommend Judge John Tinder as a bipartisan, consensus nominee for the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals.  Judge Tinder was nominated by President Bush and unanimously confirmed by the United States Senate by a vote of 93-0.  It was my hope that Judge Tinder’s confirmation would serve as an example of the benefits of nominating qualified, non-ideological jurists to the federal bench. 

In selecting the three qualified individuals sitting before you today, President Obama has demonstrated that he also appreciates the benefits of this approach.  I was proud to once again join with Senator Lugar to recommend these nominees to President Obama, and I hope that going forward other Senators will adopt what I call the “Hoosier approach” of working across party lines to select consensus nominees.

I would also like to personally thank Senator Lugar for his extraordinary leadership and for the consultative and cooperative approach he has taken to judicial nominations.  During my time in Congress, it has been my great privilege to forge a close working relationship with Senator Lugar across many issues.  This has been especially true on the issue of nominations – when a judicial nominee from Indiana comes before this committee, our colleagues can be confident that the name is being put forward with bipartisan support, regardless of which political party is in the White House or controls a majority in the United States Senate.

I also wanted to briefly note the historic nature of the nominees seated before you today.  In particular, if confirmed, Judge Tanya Walton Pratt would be our state’s first African-American federal district judge.  If Judge Magnus-Stinson were to join her on the federal bench, it would double the number of female federal judges in Indiana.  I hope that both will be confirmed, and that their appointment as federal judges will inspire Hoosier children of all backgrounds to pursue their dreams and will show them that, in America, anything is possible if you study hard and play by the rules.

On the merits, these three talented nominees share many common attributes that make them well-qualified for lifetime appointments to the federal judiciary.  All three have been recognized as leaders in the Indiana legal community, and all have the experience, insight, background, and temperament that Hoosiers expect and deserve from their judges.

These nominees have also shown themselves to be deserving of the public trust.  They have demonstrated the highest ethical standards and a firm commitment to applying our country’s laws fairly and faithfully.  In so doing, they have earned the respect and support of Indiana judges, lawyers, elected officials, and community leaders. 

In addition to their good judgment and impressive knowledge of the law, I am confident that each of the nominees appreciates the limited role of the federal judiciary.  They understand that in our constitutional system of government, the appropriate role for a judge is to interpret our laws, not to write them.

Along with being accomplished attorneys, all of these nominees are outstanding citizens. They are role models in their respective communities not only because of their considerable professional accomplishments, but because of their civic involvement and their commitment to improving the lives of their fellow Hoosiers.

Most importantly, in their professional and civic work, each of these nominees has shown themselves to be dedicated to the pursuit of the bedrock ideal of our American justice system – Equal Justice Under Law.  I am confident that this group of nominees will serve the people of Indiana and the United States with great distinction and will help ensure the speedy and efficient administration of justice for all of our citizens.

I would first like to introduce Jon DeGuilio, who has been nominated to serve in the Northern District of Indiana.  If confirmed, Mr. DeGuilio would fill the seat once held by the Honorable Judge Allen Sharp, who passed away last year after a long and distinguished career serving our state.

Mr. DeGuilio has extensive experience in federal court and has earned a well-deserved reputation as a tough prosecutor.  From 1993 to 1999 he served as the U.S. Attorney for the Northern District of Indiana, during which time he led efforts to aggressively crack down on crime and drugs and make our streets safer.  Prior to his service as U.S. Attorney, Mr. DeGuilio served as the Prosecuting Attorney for Lake County, Indiana as well as a Public Defender in Lake County Court.  He is the former President of the Hammond City Council and a former legal advisor to the Lake County Sheriff’s Office. 

A graduate of Notre Dame and Valparaiso University School of Law, next year Jon will celebrate his 30th wedding anniversary with his wonderful wife Barbara.  Together, they have two children, Suzanne and Christopher.

I would next like to introduce Judge Jane Magnus-Stinson, who has been nominated to fill one of two vacancies in the Southern District. 

Judge Magnus-Stinson is extremely well-qualified to serve on the federal bench.  She has extensive trial experience, having served as a Judge on the Marion Superior Court from 1995 to 2007.  During this time, she was recognized as a leader among Indiana jurists, serving on the Board of Directors of the Indiana Judicial Conference and the Board of Managers of the Indiana Judges Association.  Judge Magnus-Stinson also has valuable experience presiding in federal court, having served as a federal Magistrate Judge in the Southern District since 2007.

Judge Magnus-Stinson’s devotion to the fair and efficient administration of justice has been recognized by her fellow Hoosiers.  She has been honored as “Judge of the Year” by the Indiana Coalition Against Sexual Assault and as an “Outstanding Judge” by the Indiana Coalition Against Domestic Violence. 

In recommending Judge Magnus-Stinson, I have the benefit of being able to speak from personal experience, as she served as my Counsel while I was Governor of Indiana.  She is a cum laude graduate of Butler University and Indiana University School of Law.  Judge Magnus-Stinson is married to Bill Stinson and they have two wonderful daughters, Jill and Grace.

The final nominee I would like to introduce today is Judge Tanya Walton Pratt, who has also been nominated to serve on the Southern District of Indiana.

Judge Walton Pratt is highly qualified to serve as a United States District Judge.  She has extensive trial experience, having served as a Judge on the Marion Superior Court since January 1997.  For the vast majority of this time, she presided over major felonies in the Criminal Division, and was responsible for managing dozens of jury trials every year.  Judge Walton Pratt has also been recognized as a leader among Indiana jurists, and currently serves on the Executive Committee of the Marion Superior Court System, as the Supervising Judge of the Marion County Juvenile Detention Center, and on the Board of Directors of the Marion County Bar Association.

In addition to her work as a judge, Tanya Walton Pratt has also been recognized as a leader in her community. She has also been honored with numerous awards including the Career Achievement Award from the Indianapolis Archdiocese and the Key to the City of Muncie.  She is a graduate of Spelman College and Howard University School of Law.  It is my pleasure to introduce her today as a worthy and historic nominee to the federal bench.

In closing, I would like to empha my personal belief that each of the nominees before you today possesses the temperament, intellect, and even-handedness necessary to serve as a federal judge.  I have high confidence that – if confirmed – they will be superb additions to the federal bench, and I am pleased to give each of them my highest recommendation.

Madame Chairman and Ranking Member Sessions, it is my distinct pleasure to present for this committee’s consideration Jon DeGuilio, Judge Jane Magnus-Stinson, and Judge Tanya Walton Pratt.
