WASHINGTON, DC – Today, U.S. Senator Frank R. Lautenberg (D-NJ) hailed new EPA data showing the amount of toxic chemicals released into the environment nationwide decreased by 12 percent between 2008 and 2009. In New Jersey, the results were significantly better, with a 34 percent drop in toxic chemicals released. Lautenberg authored the 1986 law that created the Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) program, which requires full disclosure about toxic chemicals released into the air, land and water in neighborhoods across the country. 

“The lower emissions we’re seeing today are a direct result of the strong federal laws that prevent companies from keeping their dirty little secrets hidden from the public,” said Lautenberg, who chairs the Senate Environment and Public Works Subcommittee on Superfund, Toxics, and Environmental Health. “When you are accountable to your neighbors, it’s more likely that you will clean up your act. In communities across the country, empowered citizens are keeping a close watch on the industries operating in their backyards.”

The TRI program is the preeminent federal public right-to-know program for toxic chemicals. Health officials, federal, state and local governments, businesses and the public all use TRI data to understand and reduce threats to public health. 

The law creating TRI was authored by Sen. Lautenberg and signed into law in 1986 as part of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act. Congress passed the law to ensure that communities know what dangerous industrial chemicals are released into the air, water and ground. 

In December 2006, the Bush Administration Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced final rules weakening reporting requirements for the TRI program. The weakened rule allowed more than 3,500 facilities to stop reporting detailed information about their toxic chemical releases and waste management practices. Sen. Lautenberg stepped in to reinstate the stronger requirements by including a provision in the FY 2009 Omnibus Appropriations Act, which overturned the Bush Administration rule limiting the reporting of these toxic emissions. 

More information about the 2009 TRI analysis can be found here: http://www.epa.gov/tri

More information about the New Jersey results can be found here: http://www.epa.gov/triexplorer/statefactsheet.htm
