WASHINGTON, D.C. – U.S. Senator Frank R. Lautenberg (D-NJ) today announced that Congress has approved an extension of the deadline for service members, veterans and beneficiaries to apply for retroactive “stop loss” bonuses. Individuals affected by the military’s “stop loss” policy since 2001 will now have until March 4, 2011, to apply for a $500 bonus for each month their service was involuntarily extended beyond their separation date. 

“It is vitally important to provide this additional time so that eligible service members can come forward and claim their stop loss bonuses,” said Lautenberg, an Army veteran. “While I am disappointed that Republicans blocked a full-year budget and stop loss bonus extension, I will continue fighting to ensure our brave men and women get the compensation they deserve.” 

At the request of Senator Lautenberg, the Continuing Resolution through March 2011 approved yesterday in both the Senate and the House of Representatives included the deadline extension. Senator Lautenberg had inserted a year-long extension into a full-year appropriations bill, but that bill was blocked by Senate Republicans last week. 

Senator Lautenberg has secured extensions for the retroactive stop loss bonuses in three previous Continuing Resolutions approved this year. Lautenberg’s efforts are helping to provide the military with the time needed to conduct additional outreach to eligible claimants. Of the 145,000 service members, veterans and beneficiaries entitled to receive retroactive stop loss payments, only 71,440 have received their payments to date. 

The military’s “stop loss” policy can involuntarily extend a soldier’s military service if his or her unit deploys within 90 days of the end of the soldier’s commitment. In 2008, Sen. Lautenberg wrote legislation to provide compensation to the brave men and women affected by the stop loss policy. In June 2009, President Obama signed into law a bill that included $534.4 million to pay retroactive bonuses for troops affected by the policy.
