WASHINGTON, D.C. — U.S. Sens. Frank R. Lautenberg (D-NJ) and Robert Menendez (D-NJ) today announced that five New Jersey fire departments will receive federal funding through the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Assistance to Firefighters Grant (AFG) program.  AFG funding can be invested in vehicle acquisition, training, equipment, personal protective equipment, wellness programs, and other support for stations and facilities. 

Senator Lautenberg is the Chairman of the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Homeland Security that funds the AFG program.

“Our firefighters put their lives in danger every day to protect us and keep our families and communities safe,” Lautenberg said. “This grant program makes a direct investment in New Jersey’s local emergency personnel so that our first responders have the best equipment and training to do their job.”    ??

“Our firefighters risk their safety to protect our communities,” Menendez said.  “These investments in our local fire departments will help keep our families and neighborhoods safe by keeping our firefighters fully prepared – they deserve at least as much.”

The $167,088 from the AFG program will be distributed in New Jersey as follows:
Rockaway - $47,250 to the Rockaway Township Fire Department for operations and safety expenses.
Long Branch - $36,000 to the Long Branch Fire Department for operations and safety expenses.
Bordentown - $34,438 to the Bordentown Township Fire District No. 2 for operations and safety expenses.
Ringwood - $38,000 to the Skyline Lake Volunteer Fire Department for operations and safety expenses.
Elwood - $11,400 to the Elwood Volunteer Fire Company for operations and safety expenses.

The AFG grants are awarded to fire departments and EMS organizations to improve their capacity to protect the health and safety of the public, as well as that of first-responder personnel in fire related emergencies.

For more information about the program, please visit: http://www.firegrantsupport.com/
