NEWARK -- U.S. Senators Frank Lautenberg (D-NJ) and Robert Menendez (D-NJ) today urged President Obama to approve the State of New Jersey’s request for a federal disaster declaration related to the massive December 26, 2010 snowstorm. The request covers thirteen counties that received, in some places, more than two and a half feet of snow. The counties are: Atlantic, Bergen, Cape May, Cumberland, Essex, Hudson, Middlesex, Monmouth, Morris, Ocean, Passaic, Somerset and Union. 

“With millions of dollars in damage caused by this snowstorm, New Jersey is seeking a much-needed disaster declaration to assist in the recovery of these hardest hit areas,” the Senators wrote. “The devastation endured by New Jersey residents, business owners, and local governments merits a disaster declaration and emergency assistance. We urge you to approve this request as soon as possible to ensure the people of New Jersey can begin to rebuild and mitigate against future disasters.”

A pdf of the letter can be found here and the text of the letter follows: 

December 31, 2010

President Barack Obama
The White House
1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20500

Dear Mr. President:

We are writing to urge you to grant Governor Christie’s request for a Presidential Disaster Declaration and emergency assistance for residents of New Jersey devastated by the snowstorm that began on December 26, 2010. The areas affected most severely by this storm include: Atlantic, Bergen, Cape May, Cumberland, Essex, Hudson, Middlesex, Monmouth, Morris, Ocean, Passaic, Somerset and Union. 

New Jersey was the epicenter of a powerful blizzard that struck the region beginning on December 26, 2010, causing widespread damage and requiring a full emergency response from the state’s agencies. Record-setting snowfalls, reaching more than two and a half feet in some parts, accompanied by high winds caused power outages and made roads and sidewalks impassible. Despite the professionalism and dedication of emergency management personnel, the sheer magnitude of this disaster overwhelmed the limited resources of our state with high winds exacerbating an already difficult situation and making travel treacherous days after the snow stopped falling. 

With millions of dollars in damage caused by this snowstorm, New Jersey is seeking a much-needed disaster declaration to assist in the recovery of these hardest hit areas. The devastation endured by New Jersey residents, business owners, and local governments merits a disaster declaration and emergency assistance. We urge you to approve this request as soon as possible to ensure the people of New Jersey can begin to rebuild and mitigate against future disasters.

Thank you in advance for your full consideration of New Jersey’s request. We look forward to your prompt action on this important issue.
