WASHINGTON, D.C. – U.S. Senator George V. Voinovich (R-Ohio), ranking member of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee’s Subcommittee on Transportation and Infrastructure, issued the following statement today about President Obama’s transportation proposal announced Monday. The senator sent the president a letter on Aug. 31 urging him to support a multi-year surface transportation reauthorization bill, which would create hundreds of thousands of jobs and be an immediate stimulus to the economy. A copy of the letter is attached.

“I was pleased to receive a call Monday from President Obama acknowledging the letter I sent him last week, which urged him to support a multi-year reauthorization of the surface transportation bill. Passage of this legislation would rebuild our nation’s infrastructure and put hundreds of thousands of Americans back to work. 

“The unemployment rate in construction is a staggering 20 percent — higher than any other industry and nearly two times the national unemployment rate. According to the state departments of transportation, highway projects worth more than $47 billion are ready to go. That is why I have worked for more than a year to get a multi-year highway bill passed, and I am so pleased the president shares my understanding of our need for infrastructure investment to put people back to work. 

“On our call, I urged President Obama to be transparent in how he plans to pay for this program. Americans want us to be straightforward with them — they know that the cost of higher taxes on oil and gas companies will simply be passed down to consumers through rate increases. The president’s credibility is on the line here.

“The fact is, we should be paying for the transportation bill by increasing the gas tax, which has not risen since 1993. The gas tax is a user fee. As President Ronald Reagan said in 1982, when the nation was facing record unemployment above 10 percent, ‘Good tax policy decrees that, wherever possible, a fee for a service should be assessed against those who directly benefit from that service.’

“Reagan knew America was in dire straits and fought hard for a gas tax increase once he realized the effect it would have on the economy. It was a tough pill for his colleagues to swallow. But, in the end, Congress passed the much-needed Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1982, which provided a 5-cent gas tax increase and created hundreds of thousands of jobs. History speaks for itself.

“If President Obama were to honestly consider the gas tax like Reagan did, he would find support where he least expects it. Today, groups that don’t traditionally back tax increases — among them the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the National Association of Manufacturers, and the American Trucking Association — have come out in support of a gas tax increase because of this reauthorization bill’s ability to put Americans back to work.

“President Obama said he wants to work with us to get this done, and I look forward to sitting down together and working transparently on a bipartisan basis.”

Please find a copy of Sen. Voinovich’s Aug. 31 letter to President Obama on infrastructure below:

August 31, 2010

President Barack Obama
The White House
1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20500

Dear Mr. President:

I want you to know that I understand you have the weight of the world on your shoulders; things are more challenging now for our country than at any time during my life.  Americans are worried about our Nation’s future and their own personal well-being, and this worry has resulted in a level of fear unlike anything I have seen since my memory of the Second World War. 

People are quite unhappy with Washington because it appears to them that we do not understand their concerns.  They, frankly, cannot understand why we will not get our collective act together to address what worries them.  There are certainly looks of disbelief when Americans hear that last year we borrowed 41 cents of every dollar we spent. 

That being said, we still have an opportunity to restore their faith in their government by coming together before the end of the year to begin to address our Nation’s economic crisis.  One example of how we can do this is by working with the debt commission you created by Executive Order to deal with our unsustainable debt and deficits. 

Another thing we can do is to reauthorize the surface transportation bill.  This past July, T. Peter Ruane, President of the American Road and Transportation Builders Association (ARTBA), sent you a letter highlighting the importance of passing a transportation reauthorization bill this year.  Mr. Ruane stated that uncertainty in our market regarding future federal surface transportation funding has caused many states to put on the brakes with regards to job creating transportation projects.  In many states, these projects are not moving into either private-sector design or construction markets, resulting in a lack of hiring and the decline of large capital equipment purchases.  Many construction-related firms have worked down most of their project backlog with little new work available for bid.  In addition, Mr. Ruane’s letter reports that 30 states and the District of Columbia invested less in highway and bridge contract awards from January to June 2010 than they did over the same period last year.

I am not alone in arguing that a robust surface transportation reauthorization is critically important and must be undertaken as quickly as possible.  Although I agree with you that bipartisan support is hard to come by these days, the vital significance of this bill is recognized by my colleagues in the Senate.  Senators Boxer, Inhofe, and Baucus and our staffs are working full time to get a bill done this year on a bipartisan basis.  Daily, our staffs are putting in many hours drafting this bill.  The House of Representatives has been working on reauthorization for two and half years, and the House bill has been voted out of subcommittee.  Mr. President, you cannot show me another piece of legislation that we can get passed before the end of the year that has the bipartisan support of labor, manufacturing, business, truckers, and state and local groups, as well as from Congress.  A copy of those supporting reauthorization, and paying for it by increasing the gas tax which has not been increased since 1993, is enclosed.  

I understand that because of the gnashing of teeth about who will control Congress that a vote on reauthorization will not likely occur before November elections, but to get this bill done before the end of the year requires your leadership, so I urge you to help us pass this important legislation much like President Reagan did in 1982.  Without your support, it will surely not get done this year, and God only knows what the negative impact on our country will be. 

Sincerely,

George V. Voinovich
United States Senator

cc: Ray LaHood, Secretary of Transportation
