WASHINGTON, DC – With temperatures across the country dropping and demand for home heating assistance rising, U.S. Senators Jack Reed (D-RI) and Olympia J. Snowe (R-ME) led the effort to restore an additional $1.25 billion in for the Low Income Housing Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) in the Continuing Resolution (CR), which keeps the government running through March 4, 2011.
LIHEAP is a federal block grant program that helps nearly 9 million American households each year by providing states with annual funding to operate home energy assistance programs for seniors and low-income households.
For the last two years, Reed and Snowe led the effort to secure $5.1 billion for LIHEAP, including $4.5 billion in block grants to states and tribes.  However, this year only $2.7 billion was obligated for block grants. 
On Friday, Reed and Snowe, along with 34 of their colleagues, sent a letter to the Majority and Minority Leaders of the Senate asking for a full-year extension of last year’s LIHEAP funding level be included in the CR. 
The Reed-Snowe LIHEAP fix included in the CR ensures that the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) allocates the same amount of funds for the period covered by this continuing resolution as it obligated during the comparable period during fiscal year 2010. 
As a result, LIHEAP will receive an estimated $3.95 billion in federal block grant funding, up from the current $2.7 billion level in block grants.  If funds are allocated in similar amounts as last year, it is estimated that this will mean an additional $12.3 million for Rhode Island and $24.5 million for Maine.
“We are at a point right now where we are seeing a record need for LIHEAP and less aid to help.  This isn’t a permanent fix, but it will help ensure that millions of Americans aren’t left out in the cold this winter.  Restoring this funding will help our states and community partners provide families with emergency assistance to help our most vulnerable citizens make it through the winter,” said Reed, noting that Rhode Island received over $34.4 million in LIHEAP funding last year. 
“With heating oil prices 12 percent higher than last year and Maine’s unemployment rate at 7.3 percent, the LIHEAP program will be the only means for thousands of Mainers to stay warm during the upcoming winter months. Heating is not a luxury, it is a necessity, and LIHEAP, a program that I have supported my entire Congressional career, often serves as the only means to guarantee home heating in tough economic times. Given the economic condition of our country and the State of Maine, I believe that we should maintain the current level of funding for this critical program and I am very encouraged that this language will result in stable support for the program,” said Senator Snowe.
LIHEAP applications are expected to jump again this year as more than 10 million American households are expected to need help with winter energy bills.  In Rhode Island, there has been a 10-15% increase in new applicants this winter.
To apply for fuel assistance, residents may call their local Community Action Program (CAP).  Once enrolled in the program, individuals may work out a payment plan that protects them from having their utilities disconnected during the coldest winter months.
The Continuing Resolution is expected to be voted on in the Senate this week.
