
WASHINGTON, DC -- In an effort to strengthen museum and library services across the nation, the U.S. Senate last night approved Senator Jack Reed’s (D-RI) Museum and Library Services Act of 2010.  This bipartisan bill, which is cosponsored by Senators Michael Enzi (R-WY), Tom Harkin (D-IA), Richard Burr (R-NC), Thad Cochran (R-MS), Susan Collins (R-ME), and Jon Tester  (D-MT) authorizes nearly $300 million in federal assistance to museums and libraries nationwide.  The bill helps provide funding for the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS), a vital agency that helps museums and libraries of all sizes and types meet the needs of their communities.  
Rhode Island libraries and museums have received over $15 million in federal grants from these programs to leverage their resources and strengthen operations, upgrade technology, and expand access to services at the state and local level. 
“Libraries and museums contribute immensely to the quality of life and economic development of our communities,” said Reed.  “This is a smart investment in preserving our heritage and ensuring Americans continue to have free access to information.  During the recession, more Americans are turning to their local library to get online, search for a job, and gain critical digital literacy skills.  Like libraries, museums also provide 21st century learning opportunities, while connecting communities to the culture, science, art, and events that shape our history.”
The Museum and Library Services Act of 2010 will enhance and expand services and resources for students, job seekers, and small businesses that are provided by libraries through greater collaboration and coordination with Head Start centers, schools, and workforce development systems.  
The bill will also enhance training and professional development for librarians and ensure the development of a diverse library workforce, including by authorizing the Laura Bush 21st Century Librarian program, which has been previously funded through annual appropriations. 
It will help build state capacity to support museums by authorizing IMLS to support state assessments of museum services and the development and implementation of state plans to improve and enhance those services.  The bill will also strengthen conservation and preservation efforts. 
Additionally, it seeks to fully leverage the role of libraries and museums in supporting the learning, educational, and workforce development needs of Americans by requiring IMLS to improve coordination and collaboration with other federal agencies that also have an interest in and responsibilities for the improvement of museum and libraries and information services.  
According to the American Library Association, Americans visit libraries more than 1.3 billion times and check out more than 2.1 billion items each year.  
And the American Association of Museums reports that there are nearly 850 million visits per year to American museums, and that U.S. museums employ as many as half a million Americans and contribute approximately $20.7 billion to the economy each year.
Former Senator Claiborne Pell (D-RI) was instrumental in crafting the first Museum and Library Services Act, which was originally enacted in 1996.  In 2003, Reed led the successful effort to reauthorize the legislation and is once again leading the charge to preserve and extend critical federal support to museums and libraries.
Now that the bill has passed the Senate, it must be passed by the U.S. House of Representatives before it can be signed into law.
