WEST WARWICK, RI — U.S. Senator Jack Reed (D-RI) today joined students and staff at Wakefield Hills Elementary School in West Warwick for a behind the scenes look at the school cafeteria and urged Congress to pass legislation improving school meals before the conclusion of the 111th Congress. 
In August, Reed helped pass a child nutrition bill - the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act – in the Senate.  This legislation will increase funding for school meal programs so that more kids will have access to a stable source of nutritious food.  The bill has yet to be voted on in the U.S. House of Representatives, but action is expected shortly after Thanksgiving.  First Lady Michelle Obama has made passing this legislation the centerpiece of her “Let's Move!” campaign.
If the bill passes it could mean an additional $3 million per year in federal money to help local schools throughout the state serve healthier meals. 
“This is about giving our children healthier choices and ensuring that students have access to nutritious food,” said Reed, a member of the Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions (HELP) Committee. 
“The cost of school lunch here is $1.60 and we provide students with a square meal that not only meets nutritional guidelines but also tastes good.  I personally sample the school lunch every day and am committed to ensuring that all of our students have access to high-quality meals so they can learn and thrive,” said Wakefield Hills Elementary School Principal Keith Remillard.
Each year, Rhode Island receives $29 million in federal funding to help nearly 24,000 children participate in the School Breakfast Program and 79,000 children participate in the National School Lunch Program each day. 
Rhode Island has been a leader when it comes to nutrition standards for school meals and this bill will provide additional resources for school breakfast and lunch programs, and could significantly expand innovative after school meal programs too.
“During difficult economic times, this program will provide important stability to thousands of children who have trouble getting a nutritious meal at home.  Not getting enough healthy food in the lunchroom can hurt students’ ability to learn in the classroom.  This will help ensure that more children are well-nourished and prepared to learn,” stated Reed.
Over half of the students at Wakefield Elementary qualify for free or reduced price lunch.  Last month, students took part in an innovative “Harvest Day,” going to a local farm to pick fruits and vegetables that were then served on the school lunch menu.  The school cafeteria also hosted “All Local Day,” serving students healthy foods from nearby farms and bakeries.
If this legislation passes, more Rhode Island schools will be able to participate in farm-to-school programs to educate kids about food and add fresh, local produce to cafeteria menus.
“I want to recognize the teachers and staff at Wakefield Hills Elementary School for the good work they are doing, including putting in place great school nutrition programs that we want to see expanded and replicated by other schools,” concluded Reed.
This new school nutrition bill provides $4.5 billion over 10 years to:
             Increase the number of children receiving food at schools.
             Improve nutrition standards.
             Educate students on the importance of healthy eating. 
             Establish new standards for all foods (including vending machine fare) sold in elementary, middle, and high schools. 
             Provide training to ensure child nutrition professionals have the skills to serve top-quality meals that are both healthful and appealing to their student customers.
             Enhance food safety.
