U.S. Sen. Jim Inhofe (R-Okla.), a senior member of the Senate Armed Services Committee (SASC), today questioned the accuracy and validity of the Pentagon’s one-year study of the Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell (DADT) policy. 

“Based on my initial review of the report, I am deeply concerned about the objectivity and the conclusions of this study,” Inhofe said.  “The survey and report focused on how to repeal the law and never asked whether or not it should be repealed in the first place.  In addition, of the 400,000 surveys that were sent out to service members, only 115,000 responded.  That is less than 30 percent of those surveyed and only 5 percent of the active military population.”

 Inhofe continued, “As I look at the percentage of military members who predicted a detrimental effect, I do not understand how the panel can assess the risk to military effectiveness as low. Over 30 percent of military members surveyed believe a repeal would negatively impact the Force. That percentage is even higher if you add in military members who said a repeal would have a mixed effect.  I am also deeply disturbed by the one-sided nature of the town hall meetings and the feedback I personally received from military members who participated in those meetings. They were not open forums for discussion and debate in which leaders could hear the thoughts and concerns of military personnel.  Instead, they were a heavy handed means of forcing the policy changes and berating those who favor keeping the policy in place.” 

Inhofe added, “With these facts in mind, it is little surprise that the results of the survey were slanted to achieve the liberal political ends endorsed by President Obama and those within his Administration.  The military did not ask for this change and all the Service Chiefs and the Marine Commandant have all voiced concerns about repealing Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell.  It is now the job of Congress, especially the SASC, to peal the curtain back on the survey and the results and to look further into this matter.”
