U.S. Sen. Jim Inhofe (R-Okla.), the co-chair of the Congressional Coalition on Adoption, today welcomed Sand Springs native Kim Haley to Washington, D.C. for the Congressional Coalition on Adoption Institute’s (CCAI) annual “Angels in Adoption” award.
“It is a great honor to welcome Kim Haley to Washington in order to participate in this very special event,” said Inhofe. “As co-chair of CCAI, I am pleased to nominate Kim as a long-time advocate for assisting children from across the state. As a caretaker to over 100 foster children and an adoptive mother to three special needs children, I admire Kim’s serving heart and dedication to help children in foster care. I speak for all Oklahomans when I say thank you for your service and congratulations on a much deserved award.”  

About Kim Haley:
 
As a foster mom for the past 14 years, Kim has cared for over 100 children and adopted three special needs children. Kim has also been approved to be on the Post Adjudication Review Board and in 2007 was featured in the Annual Report from the State of Oklahoma for her work with the biological families in drug court through the Child Share Foster Care and Adoption Support Group.  Kim has dedicated her time to find adoptive parents for the children she has fostered, and still remains in contact with nearly every foster child.
 
About Angels in Adoption:

The Congressional Coalition on Adoption Institute’s Angels in Adoption™ Program provides Members of Congress the opportunity to honor an individual or entity from their district that has made an extraordinary contribution on behalf of children in need of homes. Since the program’s inception, over 1,400 Angels nationwide have received this honor. Once selected, Angels in Adoption™ travel to Washington D.C. to participate in three days of events all designed to train them in using their personal experience to affect change on behalf of children in need of homes and to celebrate their hard work and dedication to the issue. Last year’s event alone resulted in 124 human-interest stories being published in newspapers throughout the nation. These stories serve as inspiration for others to step forward to consider fostering or adopting. For more information, you can visit the Angels in Adoption Web site: http://www.angelsinadoption.org

About the Congressional Coalition on Adoption Institute:
 
The Congressional Coalition on Adoption Institute is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization dedicated to raising awareness about the millions of children around the world in need of permanent, safe, and loving homes and to eliminating the barriers that hinder these children from realizing their basic right of a family. For more information, you can visit the Congressional Coalition on Adoption Institute: http://www.ccainstitute.org
