Today, U.S. Sen. Jim Inhofe (R-Okla.), a senior member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, joined a bipartisan effort to reject consideration of S. 3454, the Defense Authorization Bill. Inhofe has remained an opponent of this legislation due to the inclusion of measures that would repeal the military’s ‘don’t ask, don’t tell’ policy ahead of the defense department’s review of the policy, provide taxpayer funded abortions in military hospitals, and grant amnesty to the children of illegal immigrants through a measure known as the DREAM Act.  Inhofe also rejected consideration of the bill because Democrat leaders failed to allow full debate and amendments to this legislation before the Senate adjourns for the November elections.  Ahead of this afternoon’s vote, Inhofe spoke on the Senate floor to address his multiple concerns. 
 
“This is another example of Washington playing politics as usual,” said Inhofe. “I am alarmed that the liberal majority continues to push their radical agenda on our country’s armed forces, without first getting the advice of our nation’s top commanders. It is imperative that this legislative body act responsibly and not pass measures that would drastically alter our nation’s military without first understanding the impacts on readiness, unit cohesion and recruitment.”
 
Inhofe continued, “To repeal the military’s ‘don’t ask, don’t tell’ policy during a time of war and without the completion of the defense department’s study, the survey of our troops, and the consent of top military officials could have a devastating impact. I believe that repealing the policy would hurt the camaraderie of our troops and subsequently our nation’s defense.  
 
“Like Hate Crimes language in last year’s bill, it is inexcusable for liberals to try to include items like granting amnesty to the children of illegal immigrants and legalizing abortion in military hospitals in the Defense Authorization Bill. This is just another attempt by the liberal majority in Congress to advance its far left agenda before the November elections by forcing their radical social policies on our nation’s military.” 
 
“Finally, every year the NDAA is fully debated with hundreds of amendments considered. During this time, members of the United States Senate have been able to discuss and debate the impact of each amendment before voting. This year should not be different. It is my hope that the Majority Leader allows Members of Congress to give this legislation full consideration following the general election in November.”  
