(Washington, D.C.) - U.S. Senator Jeanne Shaheen today announced a reorganization of her communications team, as Jonathan Lipman joined her team as Communications Director, Faryl Ury was named Press Secretary and New Media Director, and Al Killeffer was promoted to Deputy Press Secretary. Dan Jasnow continues on as Deputy Press Secretary.

"I'm very pleased to have Jonathan and Faryl aboard, and to have Al step up in this new role," Shaheen said. "All are skilled communicators with great experience in their specialties. They'll help keep New Hampshire residents informed on the work we're doing and how I'm addressing New Hampshire's concerns in the Senate."

Lipman, who grew up in Nashua, N.H. and graduated Nashua High School, previously served as communications director for U.S. Rep. Melissa Bean, (IL-08) in the House of Representatives. Prior to that, he spent nearly a decade as a reporter for States News Service, The Associated Press and the Chicago-area Daily Southtown, as the paper's Chicago City Hall and chief investigative reporter. He graduated from Northwestern University's Medill School of Journalism.

"It's great to be able to come home," Lipman said. "I grew up in New Hampshire's tradition of serious, thoughtful politics and I look forward to working with a Senator who's such a great example of that tradition."

Ury comes to Capitol Hill from The Associated Press in Washington, where she helped lead the development of AP's social media strategy and worked as a television producer. Prior to joining the AP, Ury worked as an on-air reporter for WAMU-FM, Washington's National Public Radio (NPR) station. Faryl earned her Master's of Science in broadcast journalism from Northwestern University's Medill School of Journalism. She graduated with honors from Harvard College, where she was one of the very first members of Facebook - ever.

Ury said it was appropriate that she is working for Senator Shaheen, given the Senator's former role as Director of Harvard University's Institute of Politics (IOP). "I first fell in love with politics when I came to Washington to work at ABC News, as a recipient of an IOP scholarship," Ury said. "I'm proud to be working for such a dedicated and well-respected woman."

Killeffer, who began working in Shaheen's office as a press assistant in October, most recently served as special assistant to Ned Lamont on his Connecticut gubernatorial campaign.  Previously, Killeffer worked on Shaheen's 2008 Senate campaign and Senator Dodd's presidential bid.  He is a graduate of the School of Journalism at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

"I feel extremely fortunate to be back with Senator Shaheen and her fantastic staff," said Killeffer. "I have long admired her commitment to the people of New Hampshire, and it's great to be able to advance that mission."
