WASHINGTON-U.S. Senator Jeff Sessions, a senior member of the Senate Armed Services committee, today made the following comments after an important hearing in the Senate Armed Services Committee regarding the Navy’s revised Littoral Combat Ship acquisition strategy. 

“I am satisfied with the Navy’s defense of their proposed strategy. With the approval of Congress, both contractors, Austal USA and Marinette Marine would be able to build ten Littoral Combat Ships each at no additional cost to the tax payer. In a time of economic challenges, the jobs generated through these contracts would employ thousands of individuals. For example, Austal USA in Mobile would more than double their sizeable current workforce from 1,800 to 4,000 employees over the next two to three years, making them one of the largest employers in south Alabama. 

“I was impressed by the Navy’s defense of their proposed strategy. While the LCS program had a cost problem in the beginning, Congress held the Navy accountable and the Navy confronted the costs, bringing them under the Congressional cost cap. The Navy will be able to add additional ships to the Fleet and still have money left over for their shipbuilding program.” 

The Navy recently proposed that both contractors, Austal USA in Mobile, Alabama and Marinette Marine in Marinette, Wisconsin, build ten ships each over a five-year period. Congress had previously authorized the Navy to purchase 19 ships over the same period, however, due to the rigorous competition; the Navy determined there would $1 billion in savings if Congress grants authorization for the new strategy. 

Representatives from the Navy as well as the Congressional Budget Office, Congressional Research Service, and Government Accountability Office were present at the hearing to answer the Committee’s questions on this essential naval program. The three independent research entities provided a valuable but limited analysis of the program due to the proprietary nature of the bid proposals and could not assess the actual cost savings the Navy is predicting. While they raised concerns about program risks associated with the separate mission packages and possible increased costs if the Navy decides to adopt a common combat system in the future, none outwardly condemned the Navy’s proposal. 

Language authorizing the Navy’s dual award LCS strategy has been included in the Senate’s omnibus appropriations bill, filed today, as well as the Continuing Resolution that passed in the House last week. Legislative activity is expected on both measures later this week. 
