Each year, Memorial Day stands as the national day of tribute and remembrance as we honor the service of the men and women who have sacrificed their lives for our nation.  This day is unlike other military holidays where the American people celebrate distinct conflicts or moments of victory on the battlefield; instead, we honor the individual soldiers' lives and the values that their sacrifices affirmed.  The courage of these men and women has ensured that every man, woman and child in our society can freely participate in our democracy and enjoy the security and stability of this great nation.

New Mexico has a long and proud tradition of supporting the United States military, with New Mexicans having fought for the Union in the Civil War at Glorieta Pass, the National Guardsmen who were captured at Bataan, the Navajo Codetalkers who baffled the opposition, the marines who patrolled the jungles of Vietnam, and the New Mexicans and New Mexico units currently serving in the wars in Iraq, Afghanistan, and other hostile zones around the world.  The United States has long benefited from the bravery of Americans and our state is made rich with the virtues of military service.  Our citizens' willingness to serve and the honor with which our veterans have done so is shown time and again through consistent loyalty, integrity, and self-sacrifice.

Today, let us take a moment to pay particular tribute to the nearly 5,500 men and women who have lost their lives while serving our country in Iraq and Afghanistan.  And we shall never forget the heroism displayed by the 71 sons and daughters of New Mexico who have died while answering our nation's call to service. Let us take a moment of silence to honor these men and women.

While we can never adequately repay the debt owed to those who sacrifice for our freedoms, it is nevertheless incumbent upon every American to do all we can for our veterans young and old.  In Congress, we will continue to work to provide our veterans with the best services and opportunities available to help them lead productive lives.  We are working to increase funding and access to quality health care, to guarantee that all military personnel -- active and retired -- receive increased pay and benefits, and to recognize the contributions of the veterans of New Mexico to the nation.

I am proud of recent actions by Congress to pass legislation that establishes a critical program to provide caregivers of wounded warriors with training, counseling, mental health care and support services that they need to help care for their loved ones.  This legislation also expands health care services for female veterans and breaks down many obstacles that make it difficult for veterans in rural areas to receive the health care they have earned.  With that said, I continue to have deep concerns about the problems New Mexico's veterans face in order to access quality health care provided by the VA.  I will continue to fight on your behalf to ensure the well-being of our veterans is prioritized over bureaucratic convenience.

I also continue to believe that receiving a higher education is essential to achieve a better life for oneself and one's family.  To this end, I encourage all veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan to take advantage of the opportunity to get a college degree through the expanded benefits established by the Post-9/11 GI Bill.

I hope that every New Mexican will take the time this Memorial Day to remember those who sacrificed their own lives for the greater good and reflect on how each and every one of us can serve those who so selflessly serve us all.  Their contributions are the cornerstone of our nation.  We shall never forget them.
