WASHINGTON—U.S. Senator Jeff Sessions (R-AL), Ranking Member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, spoke on the Senate floor today to detail his concerns with the DREAM Act, a mass amnesty proposal being pushed by Democrat leaders in the remaining days of the lame-duck session. The DREAM Act’s amnesty does not require a high school diploma or a college degree, and eligibility would be open to a number of illegal aliens with criminal records. 

A rush transcript of Sessions’ remarks follows: 


“Mr. President, I understand that the Majority Leader will seek to bring up the DREAM Act in a day or two. This is a very bad piece of legislation and at a time when we have massive illegality at our borders. 

One of the fundamental things that separates America from the other nations of the world is our commitment to the rule of law. We enforce our contracts and our statutes. We punish corruption. We protect the rights and privileges of citizenship. We know that one of our most unique and valuable characteristics is our legal system. 

Law is a necessary condition for a free society. Freedom cannot flourish in chaos; prosperity cannot arise from uncertainty and fear. 

Yet we have allowed our borders to descend into chaos and lawlessness. For decades, we have failed to uphold the rule of law; we have failed to protect the integrity of American citizenship. 

Even now, in a post 9/11 world, we still lack control over who or what comes into our country. Every day guns, drugs, and unknown people unlawfully pour across our broken border. The consequences of the government’s failure are felt keenly by those living in our border states. Ranchers living on U.S. soil must confront this chaos as a reality of daily life. They are denied the peaceable possession of their private property. Phoenix, the capital of Arizona, is now known as one of the kidnapping capitals of the world. 

And yet it does not have to be this way. With enough will and the determined execution of a carefully developed plan, executed by a president and supported by a Congress that has as its serious goal the elimination of this illegality, this nation can successfully secure our border in just a few short years. This is what the public wants and this is what our political leaders have obstinately refused to do. Americans are willing to consider some form of regular status for those who have peacefully lived and worked here for an extended period of time—but only after the border is secure. 

This is because the passage of an amnesty bill such as the DREAM Act is an immediate reward for the illegal entry, and there is no serious plan to stop the illegal flow—indeed, the legislation incentivizes it. 

The public will not allow us to repeat the mistakes of the 1986 amnesty. They will not fall for the ruse that we can have amnesty first and security later. They understand that if we do not secure the border first, we may never secure it at all. 

Despite this—and despite historic losses in the recent election—Democrat leaders are now pushing a reckless proposal for mass amnesty known as the DREAM Act. 

At a time when our nation is struggling with high unemployment and runaway government spending, this bill would authorize millions of illegal workers and impose an even greater burden on taxpayers. 

Making matters worse, those eligible for the DREAM Act amnesty include illegal aliens with criminal records. 

And all of this is being rushed through a lame-duck Congress with no committee review. Democrat Leaders have even introduced four versions of the same bill in just over two months, three in the last 13 days. It’s been a shell game that abuses the legislative process. 

Is it any wonder that the public has lost faith in this institution? 

Americans want us to enforce our laws. But we are considering a bill that would reward and encourage their violation. 

Americans want Congress to end the lawlessness. But this bill would have us surrender to it. 

Consider a few of the DREAM Act’s most troubling provisions:

·       The DREAM Act is not limited to children. Illegal aliens as old as 30 or 35 are eligible on the date of enactment. And they remain eligible to apply at any future age, as the registration window does not close.
 
·       You not need a high school diploma, a college degree or military service in order to receive DREAM Act Amnesty. Illegal aliens can receive indefinite legal status as long as they have a GED. And they can receive permanent legal status and a guaranteed path to citizenship as long as they complete just two years of college or trade school.
 
·       One version of the DREAM Act offers illegal aliens in-state tuition for which many American citizens are not eligible. All four versions provide illegal aliens with federal educations benefits such as work-study programs, federal student loans and access to public colleges that are already short on space and resources.
 
·       The CBO says the bill would add $5 billion to the deficit. But the number is likely to be dramatically higher. The CBO has clearly failed to account for a number of major costs factors with the DREAM Act, including unemployment, public education costs, chain migration, and fraud. Nor does the CBO take it account what history has proven: passing amnesty will incentivize even more illegality and lawlessness at the border. In addition the CBO assumes a large portion of these will obtain jobs, but there is no surplus of job opportunities. The score doesn’t count those who can’t get jobs because of this competition.
 
·       Conservative estimates say that between 1.3 and 2.1 million illegal aliens will be immediately eligible for DREAM Act Amnesty. But that number will grow significantly as the bill has no cap or sunset. Moreover, those who obtain legal status can then do the same for their relatives – even if those relatives brought them here illegally in the first place. As a result, the number of green cards granted could easily triple.
 
·       Many with criminal records will also be eligible for the DREAM Act’s amnesty. They simply must have less than three misdemeanor convictions. Those potentially eligible would include drunk drivers, gang members, and even those who have committed certain sexual offenses. The most recent version of the bill also gives the Secretary of Homeland Security broad authority to waive ineligibility for even the most severe criminal offenders and those who pose a threat to our national security.
 
·       Those who commit document fraud or who lie to immigration authorities are eligible for the amnesty as well. This is particularly troubling as it contains a potential loophole for high-risk individuals to be placed on a pathway to citizenship. One of the warning signs missed prior to 9/11 were the fraudulent visa applications submitted by the 9/11 hijackers. But this bill would likely make it more difficult to combat immigration fraud from dangerous regions in the Middle East.
 
·       The DREAM Act even contains a safe harbor provision that would prevent many applicants from being removed as long as their application is pending—even if they have a serious criminal record. This provision could dramatically hinder federal authorities and will undoubtedly unleash a torrent of costly litigation that will suck up untold hours of our law enforcement resources and abilities that ought to be focused on the border.

In short, this bill would be a disaster. 

Yet Democrat leaders remain committed to their push for this amnesty. They are again defying the public will and sending the world a message that our nation is not serious about the integrity of our borders and our laws. 

American citizenship is the envy of the world. But central to our nation’s greatness is our respect for the rule of law. By eroding that respect through reckless and irresponsible amnesty we would do a disservice not only to the 300 million Americans who call this nation home, but to all those future citizens who are applying and waiting in line to enter our country lawfully.”
