Thank you, Mr. President.

I rise today to discuss the conference report on the fiscal year 2010 budget.  Unfortunately, I will not be able to support this legislation.

As a member of the Senate Budget Committee, I spoke on this budget during committee consideration and I also spoke on it while it was on the senate floor.  I was unable to support it those two times and I am disappointed to say that I will not be able to support it here either. 

Today marks the 100th day of the Obama Administration.  It is still too early to see most of the effects of the different pieces of legislation the President has signed into law will have on America.  However, we do know one thing: it sure has cost a lot.  The price tag for the so-called stimulus bill was $780 billion.  The cost of the 2009 omnibus appropriations bill was $410 billion.  What does this mean?  It means that over these first 100 days, President Obama has spent an average of $12 billion per day.  This is a staggering rate of spending.  We cannot continue to manage our nation’s finances like this.

The budget proposed by the Obama Administration several weeks ago is no more responsible than these other bills.  It spends too much, taxes too much, and borrows too much.

I have mentioned these numbers before, but they are worth repeating.  The president’s proposal would double the publicly held national debt to more than $15 trillion.  Annual spending would leap from $24,000 per household to $32,000.  This plan would also raise taxes by $1.4 trillion over 10 years.  The increase in debt is also staggering.  The president’s proposal would double the debt held by the public in five years and nearly triple it over ten.  In fact, the proposal would create more debt than under every previous president from George Washington to George W. Bush.

Now, I know that today we are not voting on the Obama proposal.  However, I still think it is completely reasonable to discuss it.  This proposal gives us great insight into how President Obama views government, and we see that he wants to greatly expand it.  He is no longer a member of the legislative branch.  However, he is the leader of the party that controls the legislative branch, so we know he will have influence over how legislation is written here. 

One of the most troubling aspects of the document before us is the inclusion of reconciliation instructions for health care and education legislation.  I don’t want to talk about arcane Senate procedure today.  However, this is an abuse of the process.  Reconciliation is supposed to be used to return money to taxpayers and the treasury.  It makes legislation that accomplishes this easier to pass.  These instructions require a total savings of $2 billion.  This is absurd, because we know that health care reform and education legislation will cost much more than this.  In fact, as we know from the numbers I mentioned above, the Administration has spent $2 billion dollars every four hours, so this will not be any kind of significant deficit reduction.

Another worrying feature of this budget is the assault on small businesses.  President Obama admits that 70 percent of job growth will come from small businesses.  So why does this budget tax them out of existence?

My colleagues on the other side of the aisle claim they are only raising taxes on a handful of small businesses.  But they ignore the fact that they are hurting the businesses that are responsible for two-thirds of small business jobs.

Small business jobs are key to our economic recovery, but look at what the failed policies of this Congress have done for small business.  The so-called stimulus bill that added $780 billion to our national debt spent less than one half of one percent on small businesses.  Also, after mortgaging our future on the TARP bailout, 70 percent of large banks have actually decreased their small business lending.

So now these small businesses that have been devastated by the economy and cannot get a loan to make payroll are going to be hit with a massive tax increase.  How are these small business owners going to be able to hire even one more worker?  This budget is an assault on small businesses.  It taxes too much and should be defeated.

I would like to mention energy policy before I conclude my remarks.  Throughout this year’s Budget debate, we have talked a lot about energy, particularly a proposed cap and tax program.  At a time when our nation’s energy needs are continuing to grow we should turn our focus on how best to meet these needs while creating jobs instead of increasing taxes on American families.

If we act too rapidly by imposing carbon taxes, all Americans will pay the cost through dramatic increases in utility prices.  If enacted, a cap and trade revenue program will institute one of the largest tax increases in American history.  Every American will pay a sales tax whenever they turn on light switch.  This tax will be untargeted and regressive.  Even our poorest citizens will be hit by this.  This is a dangerous policy and I am startled by how much support it has received from the Obama Administration.  So much for the President’s promise not to tax anyone making less than $250,000 per year.  Maybe that is because he knows he needs more money than he can raise by taxing just the rich to pay for all of his plans to make government an even bigger part of ordinary Americans lives.

As I have outlined above, this budget has problems.  It spends too much, taxes too much, and borrows too much.  I urge my colleagues to join me in supporting fiscal responsibility by voting against this piece of legislation.
