Thank you, Mr. President.

I would now like to call up and offer my amendment 242.

The second amendment that I am offering today fixes a serious problem that millions of American seniors face every year. My amendment also puts more dollars in seniors’ wallets, which will hopefully help stimulate the economy by giving them more expendable income.

My amendment would suspend for 2009 the tax increase on Social Security benefits that Congress passed in 1993. I have been a strong advocate for eliminating this tax entirely for many years. My amendment would give seniors a one-year break from this unfair and punitive tax.

Let me start with a little bit of background. Historically, Social Security benefits were not taxed by the federal government.

However in 1983, the nation was facing an immediate shortfall in the Social Security program with the trust fund possibly running out of money in the next couple of years. Acting on the recommendations of the Greenspan Commission, Congress passed a law in 1983 that began taxing Social Security benefits for the first time.

The new law required that 50 percent of a senior’s Social Security benefit or Railroad Retirement benefit be taxed if his or her income was above $25,000 or $32,000 for married couples. The money this tax has raised over the past 26 years is dedicated to shoring up the Social Security system or Railroad Retirement System.

In 1993, Congress was faced with a similar problem. This time it was the Medicare trust fund that was going broke. Once again, Congress called on American seniors to help fix this program, by instituting another tax on Social Security benefits.

In 1993 Congress passed a law that requires 85% of a senior’s Social Security benefit be taxed if their income is above $34,000 for a single and $44,000 for a couple.

As a Member of the House in 1993, I thought this tax increase was grossly unfair. On one hand, we tell seniors to plan for retirement, and on the other hand we tax them for doing just that. CRS estimates that at least 12 million seniors pay this tax on 85 percent of their benefits.

Also, since the income levels are not indexed to inflation, more and more seniors are burdened by this tax each year.

My amendment is very simple by giving seniors a break for one year from paying this tax. While I would love to see this tax permanently repealed, suspending it for one year is a start. This amendment will help stimulate the economy immediately by allowing millions of seniors to keep more of their Social Security benefits.

With wild fluctuations in gas prices and increases in health care and food costs, this tax relief could really make a difference to millions of seniors across the county.

 

 

The amendment holds the Medicare trust fund harmless so the solvency of Medicare isn’t jeopardized. The amendment is paid for by reducing discretionary spending in the bill, except spending for veterans.

In the past many of my Senate colleagues have supported Sense of the Senate amendments to remove this unfair tax. Today, Senators will have an opportunity to vote on actually giving seniors’ relief and removing this unfair tax for just one year – 2009.

It is the fair thing to do.

I hope my colleagues can support this amendment and support over 12 million seniors who are forced to pay this unfair tax.
