The U.S. House of Representatives today approved legislation originally introduced in the Senate by Senator Jim Webb (D-VA) to recognize the marriage of fallen U.S. Marine Sgt. Michael Ferschke and his Japanese wife, Hotaru Nakama.  While Sgt. Ferschke was deployed in Iraq, the couple was married by telephone on July 10, 2008, three months after learning they were having a child. Sgt. Ferschke was killed in combat one month later. Although recognized by the Marine Corps, the couple’s marriage could not be recognized by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) because it was never consummated as dictated by an outdated 1952 immigration law passed during the Korean War. This left Mrs. Ferschke ineligible to immigrate to the United States with her and Sgt. Ferschke’s young son.

Senator Webb’s bill unanimously passed the Senate on December 3rd and now awaits President Obama’s signature.

“Every now and then, there comes an issue that tells us a lot about who we are, and how we live up to our promises, great and small--particularly the promises we make to those who step forward and place their lives on the line in order to carry out the policies that we create,” said Senator Webb, who served as a combat Marine in Vietnam. “This legislation will right a wrong for a Marine who paid the ultimate sacrifice for his country and for his family.”

After more than a year of negotiations with both the House and the Senate, Senator Webb succeeded in gaining bipartisan support for his targeted legislation to allow immigration authorities to recognize the Ferschkes’ lawful marriage.  Senators Lamar Alexander (R-TN) and Jeff Sessions (R-AL) as well as Congressman John Duncan (R-TN) strongly supported the bill’s passage.  It is the first time the Senate has passed a piece of private relief legislation in more than five years. 

Senator Webb’s bill will allow Mrs. Hotaru Ferschke to emigrate from Okinawa, Japan, where she is residing with her young son, Michael “Mikey” Ferschke III.  

Senator Webb will continue to work in a bipartisan manner to change the outdated immigration law in order to prevent similar situations from arising in the future.

To view a PDF of the legislation, please click here.
