Senators Jim Webb and Mark Warner applauded the Senate’s unanimous vote last night to confirm John A. Gibney of Richmond to the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia. The two Senators recommended Gibney’s appointment to the White House in September 2009.

Mr. Gibney, a partner in the Richmond law firm Thompson-McMullan since 2003, has practiced law for more than three decades in state and federal courts in the Commonwealth. 

“Senator Warner and I recommended Mr. Gibney because of his exceptional legal qualifications,” said Senator Webb. “He is an outstanding choice for the Eastern District, with more than 30 years of legal experience in the Commonwealth and the respect of esteemed members of the legal community. He conveys the humility, honesty and temperament that one hopes to find in federal judges.”

“John Gibney has a strong record of service both in the state and federal court system and among his fellow lawyers,” Senator Warner said. “Senator Webb and I were pleased to recommend his appointment to the President.”

Mr. Gibney is a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of the College of William and Mary, and received his law degree from the University of Virginia School of Law in 1976. After graduation, he worked as law clerk to former Chief Justice Harry L. Carrico of the Supreme Court of Virginia for two years. Starting in 1978, he worked in private practice and as Assistant Attorney General of Virginia, before joining Shuford, Rubin & Gibney in 1987. He served as a director of Shuford, Rubin & Gibney for sixteen years before moving to Thompson-McMullan in 2003.

Mr. Gibney’s has extensive legal and civic involvement in Virginia. He has been an instructor in the Virginia State Bar’s professionalism course for new attorneys. He is a member of the Chesterfield Health Care Commission, the Board of Directors of Lawyers Helping Lawyers, and of the Governor’s Substance Abuse Services Advisory Council. He has served on the State Board for Contractors, the Chesterfield County Committee on the Future, and the Virginia State Bar Third District Disciplinary Committee. He has been chairman of the Advisory Panel to United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia to recommend the appointment of a United States Magistrate. He also has served on the board of number of other charitable organizations. He is past president of the Chesterfield County Bar Association.

In March 2009 the Supreme Court of Virginia appointed Mr. Gibney to serve on the Virginia Mandatory Continuing Legal Education Board. This statewide body approves Continuing Legal Education programs in Virginia and makes recommendations concerning requirements for lawyers.
