Thank you, Mr. President.

I rise today to discuss the Fiscal Year 2010 Budget. I also plan to discuss two amendments, numbers 817 and 818 that I would like to see considered.

As a member of the Senate Budget Committee, I spoke on this budget last week during committee consideration. I was unable to support it then and, unless truly major changes are made to it here on the Senate floor this week, I will not support it here either.

Since the President first gave us a preview of his plan, we have heard a lot about this year’s budget. I have found it to be very troubling. The budget proposed by the Obama administration is unworkable, and I think everyone here knows that. It spends too much, taxes too much, and borrows too much.

The numbers in the President’s proposal were appalling to anyone that believes in any kind of fiscal restraint. It got even worse two weeks ago when the Congressional Budget Office predicted that the numbers used by the administration were far too optimistic. The President’s proposal would double the publicly held national debt to more than $15 trillion. Annual spending would leap from $24,000 per household to $32,000. This plan would also raise taxes by $1.4 trillion over 10 years. The increase in debt is also staggering. The President’s proposal would double the debt held by the public in five years and nearly triple it over ten. In fact, the proposal would create more debt than under every previous president from George Washington to George W. Bush.

With numbers like that, it is not surprising that the authors of this budget resolution before us today had to make some changes. While I applaud the efforts of Chairman Conrad to attempt to rein in some of the worst aspects of the administration’s budget proposal, it appears that we may only have an "Obama light" version before us. In fact, Peter Orszag, the director of the Office of Management and Budget, tells us that the two versions are 98% the same. The budget here on the floor still has the same problems, and, in some cases, new problems.

President Obama promised a new era of transparency in government. This is one reason why he submitted a ten year budget proposal. However, the proposal before us is only a five year projection. Also, the President’s budget assumed that Congress would continue to patch the alternative minimum tax, which digs deeper and deeper into the middle class each year. This budget assumes that it will be fixed for only the first three years of this five year plan. Everyone here knows that we are going to have to take care of those other two years, as we should.

However, it looks like we still have more tax increases here. It defies logic that this budget targets tax hikes on the very people who are good at creating jobs. we know that 70% of job growth – when we had it—came from small businesses. This budget penalizes the people who are responsible for two-thirds of small business jobs. One of the most basic economic principles is that if you want less of an activity, you tax it more. well, we must want less job creation. or maybe we only want to create jobs for government bureaucrats that spend other people’s money and our grandchildren’s money.

As I have outlined above, this budget has problems. It spends too much, taxes too much, and borrows too much. I urge my colleagues to join me in supporting changes that will make this a responsible and fair piece of legislation.

I would also like to take a few minutes to talk about two amendments I will be introducing later. The first is especially important for many of our seniors because it deals with taxes on Social Security benefits.

The amendment I will be offering sets up a deficit neutral reserve fund to repeal the 1993 increase in the income tax on Social Security benefits.

I have brought this issue before the chamber before. In fact earlier this year on the stimulus, I offered an amendment to repeal this unfair tax for just one year – 2009. That amendment failed. So with this amendment, I am taking a different tact, and using a using a deficit neutral reserve fund to repeal the 1993 Social Security tax increase.

This should be familiar to the Chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, since he offered a similar amendment using a deficit neutral reserve fund during budget consideration last year. I would like to remind my colleague that his amendment passed last year by a vote of 53 yeas to 46 nays.

When the Social Security program was created, benefits were not taxed.

However, in 1983, Congress changed the rules of the game by passing legislation to begin taxing up to 50% of a senior’s Social Security benefits if their income was over $25,000 for a single individual or $32,000 for a couple.

In 1993, Congress felt taxing 50% of benefits wasn’t good enough. That year, Congress passed and President Clinton signed a bill that allows 85% of a senior’s Social Security benefits to be taxed if their income is above $34,000 for a single and $44,000 for a couple.

The additional money this tax raises doesn’t even go to help Social Security’s solvency – instead it goes into the Medicare "Part A" program.

I opposed this tax increase then, and I oppose it today.

On one hand, we tell seniors to plan and save for retirement, and on the other we tax them for doing just that.

This amendment puts the Senate on record that this 85% tax tier would be eliminated and the maximum amount of Social Security benefits that could be taxed would be 50%.

If Congress passed legislation to do this, millions of seniors would be able to keep more of their Social Security benefits.

I hope my colleagues can support this amendment when it comes up for consideration.

I am offering another amendment to pave the way for relieving taxpayers who have suffered devastating capital losses.  During these troubled economic times, many taxpayers have been forced to sell their homes or stock at a loss. Our constituents will be stunned to learn that they can only deduct $3,000 of those losses. The $3,000 limit was set in 1976, when tax writers seemed to be ignorant about the impact of inflation. That limit is ridiculous in today’s dollars.

My amendment creates a deficit-neutral reserve fund for increasing the capital loss deduction. As if helping struggling taxpayers was not enough, this will also have an enormous side benefit of boosting our economy.  Prominent economists have noted that by eliminating some of the downside risk of investing, increasing the capital loss deduction will stimulate investment and economic growth.  So this amendment is a win for taxpayers and a win for our economy, at a time when they both need some wins.

Thank you Mr. President.
