U.S. Senator Jim Webb today called on Ambassador Eric Goosby, the U.S. Global AIDS Coordinator, to take steps to ensure China is playing a responsible role in the global effort to fight AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria. Despite being the second largest economy in the world, China is not even among the top twenty donor countries to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria, with a contribution of only $16 million. Furthermore, China is the fourth largest funding recipient, receiving over $940 million, even though its financial resources vastly exceed those of the other top grantees.  

Calling on China to take a more responsible role in its international affairs, Senator Webb said, “China’s use of the Global Fund and lack of reciprocal contribution have demonstrated how China’s actions come at the expense of developing countries seeking to overcome significant global health challenges. As stewards of American taxpayer dollars, it is important to ensure that our contributions to international financing mechanisms, such as the Global Fund, are appropriately distributed in line with the organization’s objectives.

“I strongly urge you to examine this issue and develop measures to modify the Fund’s criteria for awarding grants to ensure that countries with the greatest financial need and highest disease burden receive priority in Global Fund grants,” wrote Senator Webb, who sits as chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on East Asian and Pacific Affairs.

The Global Fund is an international financing institution that supports large-scale prevention, treatment and care programs against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria in developing countries.  Since its creation in 2002, it has committed $21.7 billion to more than 600 programs in 150 countries. Programs supported by the Global Fund have saved 6.5 million lives through providing AIDS treatment for 3 million people, anti-tuberculosis treatment for 7.7 million people and the distribution of 160 million insecticide-treated bed nets for the prevention of malaria.

The United States has contributed $4.3 billion to the Fund over eight years.


The full text of the letter is below:

Dear Ambassador Goosby,

                I am writing to express my concern with the funding decisions of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria, which have provided over $940 million in grants to China over the past eight years. China is now the fourth largest recipient of donor funding.  However, as the second largest economy in the world, it is not even among the top 20 donor countries to the Fund, with a contribution of only $16 million.

                The eligibility criteria for grants, as stated by the Global Fund, “have been designed to give the highest priority to those proposals from countries and regions with the greatest need, based on the highest burden of disease and the least ability to contribute financial resources to fight HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria.”  In large part, these criteria depend upon the World Bank’s ranking of global economies, which classifies China as a lower-middle-income country because of its lower per capita gross national income (GNI). 

While China’s burden of HIV/AIDs, Tuberculosis, and Malaria cases meets the threshold for Global Fund grants, this burden is not as heavy as other emerging economies, such as India or Indonesia.  Furthermore, its ability to contribute financial resources to combating these diseases vastly exceeds the resources of the other top 20 grantees.  Its use of the Global Fund and lack of reciprocal contribution have demonstrated how China’s actions to benefit itself are at the expense of developing countries seeking to overcome significant global health challenges. 

As stewards of American taxpayer dollars, it is important to ensure that our contributions to international financing mechanisms, such as the Global Fund, are appropriately distributed in line with the organization’s objectives. Additionally, it is important to call on China to take a more responsible role in its international affairs.  As you participate in the 22nd Global Fund Board Meeting in Sofia, Bulgaria and going forward, I strongly urge you to examine this issue and develop measures to modify the Fund’s criteria for awarding grants to ensure that countries with the greatest financial need and highest disease burden receive priority in Global Fund grants.
