Charleston, W.V.—Senator Joe Manchin has selected Commerce Secretary Kelley Goes to be his State Director, based out of his Charleston office.
“I’ve worked with Kelley for years and know her to be a sharp, hard-working, and fierce defender of West Virginia. I am confident she will make an outstanding State Director, one who puts the needs and interests of West Virginians first. Kelley achieved a great deal as both West Virginia’s Commerce Secretary and Executive Director of the West Virginia Development Office, and now she will have an opportunity to continue her role in public service as my State Director. I am incredibly grateful to have her come aboard my team.”

In her role as State Director, Ms. Goes will oversee all of Senator Manchin’s West Virginia offices. A graduate of Braxton County High School, Ms. Goes served as Secretary of Commerce and Executive Director of the West Virginia Development Office in Governor Manchin’s Administration. Previously, she worked as Deputy Secretary and General Counsel in the West Virginia Department of Commerce, and she has worked in the West Virginia Attorney General’s office and in private law practice. A graduate of Vanderbilt University, Ms. Goes received her law degree from the University of Kentucky. 

“It’s been a privilege and an honor to serve in West Virginia State government,” said Ms. Goes. “I look forward to continuing my role in public service with Senator Manchin, and I am committed to a smooth transition in setting up the Senator’s office and responding to constituents’ needs.”
Sara Payne Scarbro also joins Senator Manchin’s Charleston office as Deputy State Director and Press Secretary. Ms. Payne Scarbro worked in the Governor's Press Office for the past two administrations, and most recently served as Communications Director for Gov. Manchin's office.

She is a 2003 graduate from Marshall University with a double major in Political Science and Journalism, with a concentration in public relations. 

“I am confident that Kelley, with the assistance of Sara, will be able to run effectively our statewide offices and respond to the people of West Virginia,” said Senator Manchin. “They know that our main responsibility is to serve the people of West Virginia and we’re eager to hit the ground running.”
