Washington, D.C. – Senator Joe Manchin today announced the appointment of Chris Kofinis as chief of staff.
“I am extremely pleased that Chris has agreed to lead my Senate team,” Senator Joe Manchin said. “I have known him for several years now and value his friendship, experience and expertise. He will bring years of knowledge and professionalism to this office that will not only benefit me, but all West Virginians.”
Throughout his political career, Mr. Kofinis has worked as a Democratic strategist, communications advisor and most recently as a campaign and media consultant with McMahon Squier & Associates. In addition, he was a personal advisor to then-Governor Joe Manchin and to his 2010 Senate campaign.
"It is an honor to serve as Senator Manchin's Chief of Staff,” Mr. Kofinis said. “Senator Manchin is a true champion for West Virginia and hard-working families. His love for family, country and West Virginia is clear, and as I found out, his commitment to public service is truly infectious."
Mr. Kofinis served as a senior advisor to two presidential campaigns, Wesley Clark (2004) and John Edwards (2008) and advised political candidates and parties internationally. He has worked closely with labor and was a consultant and communications advisor to a number of Fortune 100 companies. Most recently, he served as the senior communications advisor to the Democratic Governor's Association during the 2010 election cycle, and worked as a strategic communications consultant with Purple Strategies - a bipartisan public affairs firm headed by Steve McMahon and Alex Castellanos.
"I share Senator Manchin's belief that the significant and profound challenges we face as a nation demand more from all of us, and I am committed, for as long as is necessary, to doing all I can to help the Senator fulfill his mission to better the lives of the people of West Virginia and the nation,” Mr. Kofinis added.  
Over the years, Chris has been a regular commentator on politics and elections, appearing frequently on MSNBC, FOX News, CNBC, FOX Business, CNN, CBS, ABC, NBC and Bloomberg TV. He has been quoted extensively in the Associated Press, Politico, The Hill, Reuters, Los Angeles Times, Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, The Washington Post as well as other national and international news media.
Mr. Kofinis earned a M.A. in Public Policy and Ph.D. in Political Science from Claremont. He is a former professor who has done extensive teaching, research and writing on public policy and international affairs.
Chris Kofinis is the latest addition to Senator Manchin's staff, with Kelly Goes as state director and Sara Payne Scarbro as deputy state director and press secretary.
