Charleston, W.Va.– Senators Jay Rockefeller and Joe Manchin, along with Governor Earl Ray Tomblin, today recognized the 20th anniversary of the West Virginia Japan Office located in Nagoya.  The Japan Office is a branch of the West Virginia Development Office.
 
“I am proud to have urged the creation of our Japan office over 20 years ago due to my strong belief that private sector partnerships and cultural exchange between West Virginia and Japan would create jobs, spur economic growth and be of mutual benefit to the good relations between our two countries,” said Senator Jay Rockefeller. “And that belief has paid off – since 1990, West Virginia has welcomed 20 Japanese companies to the state. The value of this office is incredible and I thank everyone involved – both here and in Japan – for their hard work. I know that our relationship with Japan will continue to create a brighter future.”
 
“I visited this office in Nagoya and I’ve seen firsthand that this office yields great results,” said Senator Joe Manchin. “We’ve enjoyed a close partnership with Japanese companies over these past 20 years which has led to tremendous growth in West Virginia, particularly in the auto-industry sector.  We’ve been able to show Japanese companies that we have the best workers in the world and our relationship remains strong. Opening the Japan office was the right decision. It serves as an important part of West Virginia’s effort to attract jobs and build a brighter figure for our families, and I congratulate them on this impressive milestone.”
 
“It is fitting that West Virginia celebrate the long and productive relationship we have had as a result of  West Virginia’s Japan Office,”  said Governor Earl Ray Tomblin.  “In today’s global economy, it is critical that West Virginia continue to work in partnerships that enhance and advance our financial growth. I am pleased to acknowledge the achievements of the past twenty years and I confidently look forward to greater success which will benefit West Virginia and our ready and capable workforce.”
 
A reception was held today at the Nagoya Hilton to celebrate the event.  More than 85 guests attended including representatives of many of the 21 Japanese companies that have invested in West Virginia. 
 
Background:
 
The Nagoya, Japan office opened in 1990 with the purpose promoting West Virginia made products and attracting investment. The office’s work has resulted in the attraction of 20 Japanese companies to West Virginia – including NGK Spark Plug in Sissonville, Diamond Electric in Eleanor and Toyota Motor Manufacturing in Buffalo.
