BOSTON – Senators John Kerry and Scott Brown, along with Congressman Mike Capuano, today praised the final passage of legislation naming the U.S. Post Office in Jamaica Plain after Lance Corporal Alexander Scott Arredondo.                                        

“This dedication will forever honor the courage and sacrifice of Lcpl. Arredondo,” said Sen. Kerry.  “We hope this memorial serves as a reminder to Arredondo’s family and loved ones that his service will never be forgotten.”

“No action on our part can approach the bravery and commitment of Lance Corporal Arredondo,” said Sen. Brown. “Renaming this post office in his honor will serve as a small tribute to his sacrifice, and I am pleased the Senate has moved forward with this measure.”

“This is a small way to honor the memory of Lcpl. Arredondo who sacrificed his life for all of us.  He was a dedicated and selfless individual, and my thoughts are with his family, who endured such a tremendous loss,” said Rep. Capuano.

Congressman Capuano authored legislation in the House to rename the facility in Lcpl. Arredondo’s honor.  Last month, Senators Kerry and Brown wrote a letter to Senators Tom Carper (D-Del.) and Senator John McCain (R-Ariz.), Chairman and Ranking Member of the Senate Subcommittee on Federal Financial Management, Government Information, Federal Services, and International Security, urging committee passage of the bill.

Lance Corporal Arredondo, a Randolph native who was raised in Jamaica Plain, was killed August 25, 2004 in Najaf, Iraq while on his second tour of duty. Lcpl. Arredondo received the Navy Cross with Combat V and the Purple Heart for his heroic actions as a fire team leader who fought enemy forces in Najaf.  In the battle leading to his death, Lcpl. Arredondo led his fellow Marines through a two story building, working to clear and secure it. His squad gained control of the building after enduring intense enemy fighting. Lcpl. Arredondo was mortally wounded by a sniper as he checked on the security of his fellow Marines.

The United States Postal Service located at 655 Centre Street in Boston’s Jamaica Plain neighborhood will be designated as the “Lance Corporal Alexander Scott Arredondo, United States Marine Corps Post Office Building.”
