Mr. President, I rise today to address the nomination of Solicitor General Elena Kagan to the Supreme Court of the United States.
 
The nomination of Ms. Kagan has stirred up an old debate in our country.  There are some that say that our Constitution is outdated and the intent of our Founders when drafting it no longer relevant. 
 
However, I am of the belief that the United States Constitution is the very foundation of our country and its words and the written intent of our Fathers are the cornerstone of our freedoms, our liberty, and our protection from radical actions and ideas.
 
Alexander Hamilton addressed this very issue when he said that, “Our founders clearly revealed their central purpose was defending Americans’ rights and liberties against encroachment, particularly by an overbearing national government. The Supreme Court’s major purpose is preventing such overstepping. That requires following the Constitution as the highest law of the land in fact as well as on paper, because as George Mason put it, ‘no free government, or the blessings of liberty, can be preserved to any people but by… frequent recurrence to fundamental principles.’ If we are to be true to our heritage, the coming Supreme Court nomination debate must focus on those principles.”
 
It is with these words from Alexander Hamilton that I have thoroughly considered Ms. Kagan’s qualifications and fitness to serve as the next Supreme Court justice.  And specifically, whether Ms. Kagan will uphold the written word of the United States Constitution and the intent of our Founding Fathers or twist it to fit a favored political outcome.
 
I had the privilege of meeting with Solicitor General Kagan a few weeks ago and I, like most who met with her, was impressed by her intelligence and poise. There is no question that she has a vast knowledge of the law which stems from years of working as a Supreme Court law clerk, an advisor to President Clinton, Dean of Harvard Law School, and through her current position as Solicitor General.

When I had the opportunity to ask Ms. Kagan about her views on the founders’ intent of the Second Amendment, she informed me that although she had read much analysis regarding the Second Amendment, she had never studied its history or origin.  Certainly, this statement was surprising to me, especially given her documented history of hostility toward the Second Amendment.

This hostility became apparent for the first time as a law clerk for Justice Thurgood Marshall when she said, “I’m not sympathetic” to an individual’s argument that the D.C. handgun ban violated his Second Amendment rights.

I have been rather vocal on this issue and I have advocated strongly against the District of Columbia’s denial of this fundamental right for law-abiding citizens.

The case that Ms. Kagan was ‘unsympathetic’ toward involved Lee Sandidge, an African-American business owner who was arrested and convicted in D.C. for possessing ammunition and an unregistered pistol without a license.  He faced up to ten years in prison, but received a suspended sentence of probation and $150 fine.  Mr. Sandidge’s Second Amendment claim that Ms. Kagan cared little for challenged the same restrictive D.C. gun control law that was struck down by the Supreme Court in the 2007 Heller decision.

In this instance, I believe that Ms. Kagan allowed for her personal beliefs and emotions to cloud the meaning of the United States Constitution, since she apparently did not care to look to the founders’ intent or cite legal precedent.

Her lack of sympathy for gun owners and gun rights was again apparent during her years at the Clinton White House where she coauthored two policy memos in 1998 that advocated for White House events and policy announcements on various gun proposals, including “legislation requiring background checks for all secondary market gun purchases,” a “gun tracing initiative,” and a call for a new gun design “that can only be shot by authorized adults.”

Ms. Kagan also played a role in an executive order that required all federal law enforcement officers to install locks on their weapons.

When it comes to the Second Amendment, I believe that Ms. Kagan shows a blatant disregard for the United States Constitution, and a feigned ignorance for the intent of our founders when crafting this amendment- however, this has not deterred her from providing advice to her superiors on an issue that she goes to great lengths to nullify.

Unlike Ms. Kagan, my colleagues and I, along with millions of Americans have studied the intent of our founders in regards to the Second Amendment.

The founders looked to the writings of prominent philosophers when debating the importance of the right to keep and bear arms to protect the people of this country from tyranny and from a governing class that had a history of shown propensity for oppression.  The Second Amendment was drafted to address an issue of trust, protection, and most of all, to establish individual rights over the government.

James Madison wrote in Federalist paper 46 that the Constitution, “preserves the advantage of being armed which Americans possess over people of almost every other nation. . . where the governments are afraid to trust people with arms.”

St. George Tucker, the first commentator on the Constitution, wrote in 1803, that the Second Amendment was “the true palladium of liberty” and that, “the right to self-defence is the first law of nature: in most governments it has been the study of rulers to confine the right within the narrowest limits possible.  Wherever standing armies are kept up, and the right of the people to keep and bear arms is, under any colour or pretext whatsoever, prohibited, liberty, if not already annihilated, is on the brink of destruction.”

Ms. Kagan has stated, when asked whether she personally believes that there was a pre-existing right to self-defense before the Constitution, she said she “didn’t have a view of what are natural rights independent of the Constitution.”

Ms. Kagan’s shocking admission upholds my conclusion that she does not believe the Second Amendment codifies with the beliefs of our founders who fervently believed the right to keep and bear arms was a natural right.

Ms. Kagan’s failure to study the history surrounding the Second Amendment is in stark contrast to her emphasis on the importance of students studying international law at Harvard Law School.  As Dean, she mandated the study of international law, but made the study of the constitution optional.  As an American, I find this thoroughly insulting.

When asked, “What specific subjects or legal trends would you like [Harvard] to reflect?” Kagan responded: “First and foremost international law. . .we should be making clear to our students the great importance of knowledge about other legal systems throughout the world.  For 21st century law schools, the future lies in international and comparative law, and this is what law schools today ought to be focusing on.”

Her decision to not educate American law students on the cornerstone of American freedom, the United States Constitution, allows Harvard law students to graduate without ever taking a course in constitutional law.  This I feel demonstrates her willingness to set aside the core principles of our democracy in favor of “good ideas” for an outcome favorable to her political beliefs.

In fact, Ms. Kagan need look no farther than the Declaration of Independence to understand our founders intent in regards to our Second Amendment when they wrote, “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.”

I am of the belief that our Constitution is what helps to make this country the best in the world and it’s what stands between the United States of America and every other country on earth.

Ms. Kagan’s penchant for political activism was showcased in her treatment of military recruiting during her tenure as Dean of the Harvard Law School and her decision to ban military recruiters from campus over objections to the Don't Ask Don't Tell policy. 

As Dean of the Harvard Law School, Ms. Kagan barred the military from the campus recruiting office, even as our troops risked their lives in two wars overseas that stemmed from the deadliest terror attack on American soil, September 11, 2001. She did so in defiance of a federal law, the Solomon Amendment, which requires that the military receive “access. . . at least equal” to that of other employers.  In fact, Solomon’s explicit equal access clause passed this chamber unanimously in 2004, one month before Ms. Kagan began blocking recruiters.

Despite a clear record on this issue, Ms. Kagan testified during her hearing that the military had “full,” “excellent,” and even “complete” access during her tenure as Dean.  Documents from the Pentagon, however, demonstrate that recruiters were “stonewalled,” and that banning them from the recruitment office was “tantamount to chaining and locking the front door of the law school.”  During this contentious period, she filed briefs, spoke at protests, and sent campus-wide e-mails attacking the governmental policy.

Given Ms. Kagan’s fierce opposition to the Don’t Ask Don’t Tell law, in her hearing for Solicitor General, she was specifically asked whether she would be able to set aside her personal political views and defend that law. She testified that she would defend the law with vigor.  However, a review of her record reveals something different.

As Solicitor General, she chose not to challenge a Ninth Circuit ruling that significantly damaged and undermined Don’t Ask Don’t Tell.  It is my belief that by neglecting to do this, she failed in her duty as Solicitor General and violated the pledge that she made to the United States Senate.

I wish I could say that her history of activism ended here, but we need only look back to her work as an advisor to the Clinton administration to see a demonstrated proclivity to inject progressive views and an activist agenda into all her work, a trait that I am afraid she is unlikely to abandon if confirmed.

Ms. Kagan’s proclivity toward judicial activism is best highlighted in her inability to express a limit on the federal government’s power.

At her hearing, she was unable to identify a single meaningful limit on federal government power under the Commerce Clause.  As the federal government continues to expand both in scope and size, we need Justices who recognize and are willing to enforce the limitations the Constitution places on the federal government.  Given that Ms. Kagan apparently does not recognize those limitations, it is clear that she would not enforce them.

As a Supreme Court justice, Ms. Kagan is likely to rule in favor of the government as opposed to enforcing the vital role that the Supreme Court plays in keeping the overreaching arm of the government in check.

After thoroughly studying Ms. Kagan’s record and after questioning her on my many concerns, I feel that I must remind Ms. Kagan on the intent of our founding fathers when establishing the United States as the world’s leading democracy and symbol of freedom throughout the world:

“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.”

If confirmed as a Supreme Court justice, I fear that Elena Kagan will be unable to set aside her personal beliefs and uphold even these most basic tenets of the United States of America. I believe her reign as a Supreme Court justice will lead to the interpretation of international law over the United States Constitution, will lead to a great assault on the Second Amendment, and will be marred by precedent of court cases rather than intent of founders.

As the highest court in the land, the Supreme Court plays a vital role in keeping the overreaching arm of government in check.  That said, anyone nominated to sit on the bench of this court must be willing to do the same –set aside personal politics and views and defer to the Constitution for the good of our country.

While I am impressed with her intellect and accomplishments, my meeting with Ms. Kagan and my review of her record did little to dispel my concerns as to whether she will adhere to the Framer’s intent of the Constitution.
Ms. Kagan’s lack of support for the United States military, demonstrated hostility toward the Second Amendment and her propensity toward political activism signal to me that her role on the Court would be one of liberal judicial activism.  For this reason, I will respectfully oppose her nomination to the United States Supreme Court.
