There are so many reasons I am proud to be a West Virginian, and why I am thankful every day to represent our state in the United States Senate.  During this Thanksgiving week, I give special thanks for our sense of community and commitment to one another – for West Virginia’s hard workers, giving neighbors, and honest, good-hearted people.
 
West Virginians are some of the strongest, most resourceful individuals in the nation, and our greatest work is done when we come together to help each other in times of trouble or share in times of joy.
 
West Virginians work long hours – in the small businesses and mom-and-pop stores serving our communities, in the Veterans clinics and medical centers caring for our vets, in our mines – keeping the lights on in America, and in our classrooms training our state’s next generation.  I am so thankful for every one of our workers and all that they do – as social workers and caregivers, first responders, engineers and community leaders. Their spirit, optimism, and unending hard work keep our state strong.
 
We know that it is especially hard to celebrate holidays in a tough economy. We must keep working to get the economy moving in a way that creates jobs, restores home values, and protects retirement.  For those out of work or underpaid this holiday season – it is frustrating and hard – but we also know that West Virginians help each other through tough times.  I am thankful for everyone who has contributed time or other resources toward making sure that each of our neighbors has a meal on the table.  Holidays – in good times and bad – renew our spirits and remind us of the importance of family and community and faith.
 
As we join hands in prayer with friends and family and sit at the dinner table during this special time of thanks, it is my wish that not just during this holiday, but every day, we can work together to reach the greater good. I know that our resilience and constant efforts will help to create a brighter future for West Virginia and our nation.
 
Happy Thanksgiving to all.  May God bless you and your loved ones, our great state and the United States of America.
