U.S. Senator Johnny Isakson, R-Ga., today released the following statement regarding the need for Congress to end reckless spending and reform the federal budget process:

"I supported a temporary, two-year moratorium on congressional earmarks today because I agree we should not be funding projects that are frivolous or non-essential functions of the federal government. 

"The oath I swore to uphold when I was elected by the people of Georgia was to the U.S. Constitution, which directs the Congress to appropriate federal tax dollars. I will never abandon my oath, and I will continue to fight for funding for projects such as the expansion of the Savannah port that is critical to my state and to U.S. trade, the settlement of the tri-state water compact involving Georgia, funding for our troops and the best interests of the people in the state of Georgia.

"I also will push for Congress to address the biggest concerns of my Georgia constituents – skyrocketing federal spending and debt. I will continue to push my proposal for Congress to switch to biennial budgeting so that we can give federal spending the scrutiny and oversight that has been sorely lacking. In addition, I supported several other proposals today to reduce discretionary spending, balance the budget, freeze federal hiring, stop unfunded mandates to the states and impose a moratorium on new entitlement spending."

In a meeting of the Senate Republican Conference, Isakson supported a non-binding resolution calling for an earmark moratorium for the 112th Congress. He also supported several other non-binding resolutions to address out-of-control federal spending. Isakson has introduced, co-sponsored or voted for legislation to curb federal spending numerous times since he came to the Senate in 2005.

Isakson has introduced legislation, S.169, that would require the president to submit a two-year budget at the beginning of the first session of a Congress. Members of Congress would then need to adopt a two-year budget resolution, a reconciliation bill if necessary and two-year appropriations bills during that first session. The legislation ensures the enactment of two-year appropriations bills by providing a new majority point of order against consideration of an appropriations bill that fails to cover two years.

The second session of a Congress would then be devoted to the consideration of authorization bills and oversight of federal programs. Isakson believes the enhanced oversight will result in more accountability of government programs.
