Washington, DC – Senator Jay Rockefeller today announced that the Appalachian Regional Commission (ARC) has approved an additional $200,000 grant to compliment a $1.5 million grant to the Mingo County Redevelopment Authority for water and sewer system extensions that will serve Mingo Central High School and additional development sites along the King Coal Highway.
 
“This is a great announcement for Mingo County— not only are these improvements important for the health and safety of residents, they will also stimulate the local economy and provide great job opportunities,” said Rockefeller.  “Because of the water and sewer system improvements and completion of the highway, additional opportunities will be available to attract new businesses to the area and for more local startup companies to expand their operations, putting even more West Virginians to work.”
 
Mike Whitt, Executive Director, Mingo County Redevelopment Authority, expressed strong appreciation to Senator Rockefeller for supporting the efforts to complete the construction of the King Coal Highway and to improve the water and sewer systems in Mingo County.  “Senator Rockefeller understands just how important this funding is to the future of Mingo County— it will provide jobs, improve educational opportunities, and diversify our economy.  This will be the first time in the history of Mingo County that we have a highway, development sites out of the flood plain, and utilities that can give our community the ability to start marketing for new businesses, new housing developments and new educational facilities.” 
 
Background
 
Senator Rockefeller met with Mingo County officials earlier this month to discuss several economic development projects in Mingo County, including water and sewer system improvements along the King Coal Highway.
 
As part of the development opportunities with the construction of the King Coal Highway, Mingo County is developing a new high school on a site on the new highway, which currently does not have access to water and sewer services.  Extending the water and sewer service from Matewan will provide for initial service to the new high school.  Capacity will also be provided to enable development of approximately 450 acres in the vicinity.  In future phases of development, according to the ARC, utilities would be extended along the highway to support additional job creation and economic investment. 
 
The Mingo County Redevelopment Authority, through the use of these funds from the ARC, will extend water and sewer lines from the existing Matewan water and sewer systems to the high school site.  Components will include about two miles of water line and a 200,000-gallon water storage tank, and nearly 2.5 miles of sewer line.  The Town of Matewan will own and operate the facilities.
