Mr. President, the American people have accused Washington and this chamber of being far too partisan, and they’re right.  But I would venture to guess that we can reach a bipartisan agreement on the fact that our economy has taken a major hit over the last few years; a hit that I would argue we have yet to recover from. 

So, here we are, debating another massive bill that is supposed to stave off another economic disaster, but does it really do that?  I’m sure that most here are familiar with the children’s tale of the boy who cried wolf far too often.  The problem faced by this character was that when there really was an emergency, like a wolf verging on attack, there wasn’t anyone around to take his alarm seriously. 
This is the path that we are heading down.  The Senate is passing massive bill after massive bill and expanding the federal government to an unsustainable level all in the name of avoiding another economic downturn.  But what we’re really doing here is setting our country up on a course that we cannot correct and creating unintended consequences that may ultimately rain more economic damage down onto the American people.

‘Too big to fail’:

I think it’s important to remind the American people why the government felt it necessary to use taxpayer dollars to bailout Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac; they did this because they claimed that the two companies were ‘too big to fail’.  The idea that the failure of two mortgage companies could bring down the whole of the U.S. economy was frightening to many, but confusing to many more. 
Make no mistake- this was a problem that Congress created.  Beginning in the 1990s, Congress decided to expand on the goals of the Community Reinvestment Act by writing laws designed to encourage the GSEs to meet certain “affordable housing goals”, giving Fannie and Freddie government permission to buy subprime home loans.  This of course created an incentive for lenders to make more and more bad loans since the GSEs would stand ready to buy them and take on the risk.  As we now know, however, it is the American taxpayer that has taken on that risk.  

Before September 2008, few Americans realized that Fannie and Freddie had taken over the subprime mortgage market and were single-handedly making the dream of homeownership a reality for thousands of Americans that were realistically unable to afford the mortgages that Fannie and Freddie guaranteed. 

As home after home, neighborhood after neighborhood fell victim to the home foreclosure plague, Fannie and Freddie’s losses started to greatly impact the U.S. economy, hence the notion of being ‘too big to fail’.  But I have spent the last two years arguing that the government’s interference in this situation, with a taxpayer bailout, was not the right move to make.

By stepping in, a blank taxpayer check in hand, the government set the American people up for bailout after bailout of Fannie and Freddie with no plan in place to reform these companies so that the taxpayer’s support would eventually end.  Last Christmas, the Obama Administration lifted its $400 billion limit on aid to Fannie and Freddie and pledged unlimited support through 2012.
Let me state that again, unlimited support to Fannie and Freddie. Can you even imagine what that means? Mr. President, we don’t have the funds to provide this kind of support and the American people should not be on the hook for an indefinite blank check.

In just this last month, while we have been debating this bill on the floor, Fannie Mae has asked for another $8.4 billion in taxpayer money and Freddie has asked for an additional $10.6 billion. Is the American taxpayer to assume that we will continue to fund their demands for more money every single time that they ask?  What if this happens to be a monthly request for the next two years?  The American taxpayer has no choice but to pay up.

Simply put, this is ridiculous.  Fannie and Freddie are referred to as government-sponsored entities because the wallets of the American people go straight into the bank accounts of these companies.  The purpose of this financial reform bill should be to protect taxpayers against ‘too big to fail’ bailouts, but it does nothing to address this issue.

I offered an amendment to do just this, however, it was defeated mostly along party lines.  My amendment would have protected taxpayers from future bailouts of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac by restricting their size so that they do not continue to be ‘too big to fail’.  Fannie and Freddie remain large enough to threaten the stability of the economy in another downturn, and my amendment would have limited their size to less than 3% of the GDP.  But again, it was defeated mostly along party lines.
If the government is arguing that we have to continue the bailouts of Fannie and Freddie because they’re ‘too big to fail’, shouldn’t we be doing something to fix this problem?

Senator McCain and Senator Shelby also introduced an amendment to protect the taxpayers from ‘too big to fail’, but their amendment was also defeated along party lines.  Their amendment, of which I was a cosponsor, would have meaningfully reformed these government-sponsored entities in an orderly fashion.  It would have ended the government-takeover of Fannie and Freddie within three years, would have provided more oversight of the companies, and would have eventually eliminated all government subsidies to Fannie and Freddie within thirteen years.  This amendment was a thoughtful, clear-eyed approach to dealing with the two companies that drove my state and our country into the housing foreclosure crisis.  But again, this was defeated along party lines.  

Instead of seeking meaningful reform of the GSE’s through this financial reform bill, those on the other side of the aisle have decided that they will study the issue of Fannie and Freddie some more and have asked that the Treasury Department make a recommendation on these companies in 2011. 
In simple terms, this means that we have punted dealing with the risk that Fannie and Freddie pose to our economy for another year, and undoubtedly, a few more blank checks from now.  By the time that Democrats and the Treasury Department have further evaluated their risk, 30 months will have come and gone with the taxpayers holding up these two companies with their hard-earned money.

This is unacceptable and frankly, it is unconscionable to ask the hard-working taxpayers of this country to foot the bill for hundreds of billions of dollars of bailouts when Congress and the Administration cannot even come up with a plan for Fannie and Freddie within two and a half years of taking them over. 

Additionally, the bill before us today creates a new Financial Stability Oversight Council that will have the authority to vote on which companies are “too big to fail”. 

As we saw during the height of the financial crisis, the government, given the opportunity, is willing to arbitrarily select which companies can get government sponsorship and support.  This sets a dangerous precedent that will encourage large companies to take unnecessary risks, since they will ultimately pass any losses associated with that risk onto the taxpayers in the form of a bailout.
Under the bill before us, the Financial Stability Oversight Council, under the guise of monitoring systemic risk to the financial system, will have the unintended consequence of encouraging more taxpayer bailouts.  This is because the Council has the authority to identify firms that would “pose a threat to the financial stability of the United States” and place them under Fed supervision.

The benefit of being placed on this exclusive list is that it comes with a market understanding that the US government stands ready to keep the company afloat when it gets in trouble. This means that the company will have certain advantages that its competitors do not, including access to cheaper funds. 
This will consolidate the market and enable the company to use the savings to take on bigger and unnecessary risk. A regulatory structure that facilitates this kind of moral hazard does not work.
Remember that boy who cried wolf story that I was rehashing earlier?

Well the wolf came when confronted with the collapse of Fannie and Freddie and the government rushed in, no plan in hand, to bailout these companies, and now we’re sitting around debating legislation that does not even address the risk that they still pose in another economic downturn. 

Do you honestly think that we’re protecting ourselves from another ‘too big to fail’ bailout of Fannie and Freddie?

This bill should have been our chance to protect the taxpayers and reform Fannie and Freddie, but we’re ignoring this issue and the systemic risk that follows with it.  More simply stated, we’re ignoring the American people. The next time that the government cries wolf and steps in to bailout Fannie and 

Freddie again, the American people are going to be up in arms, as they should.

Bankruptcy:

We’re ignoring the American people at a time when they have joined together across this country to shout from every rooftop, mountaintop, and platform that they can find that they are done with bailouts.  Washington isn’t listening.  People in this body believe that we know better than the American people and if they just sit back and let us do our job, we’ll figure it all out; this is not reality.  When Washington is in charge of something, we undoubtedly make it a larger mess than it was to begin with, but some of us just don’t get it.

Some don’t get that the taxpayer should not be on the hook for bailing out the financial industry when there is a proper course of action for companies that are struggling to pay their debts, it’s called bankruptcy. 

Wouldn’t you agree that if the bankruptcy process is good enough for Main Street, then it better be good enough for Wall Street?

When the automakers were struggling with the economic downturn, I argued that they should utilize the bankruptcy process to reorganize, but the government thought that it knew better and decided to bail them out.

Then the government decided who the winners and losers would be instead of following the rule of law.

The same has happened with the financial industry, instead of declaring bankruptcy, the financial giants waited for the government to step in and lend them an American taxpayer hand. The executives drove those companies into the ground and when the bailout came, those same executives received huge bonuses. Does this make sense to you?

Moving forward, this needs to end.

But this bill does not end it.  Under this bill, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the FDIC, would have expanded authority to take over, manage, and liquidate troubled financial companies.  The FDIC would take over the assets and operate the financial company with all the powers of the management, directors, and shareholders.  In that way, the government acting through the FDIC, will continue to determine which financial companies continue and which do not. 

This bill would essentially institutionalize the kinds of bailouts that have occurred in the recent crisis. Rather than providing an alternative to policy of bailouts, it would permanently establish such a policy. Second, the expanded resolution authority would be operated with a considerable degree of discretion about when to start the intervention and about the priority to give different creditors.

People talk about the impact of Lehman Brothers’ sudden collapse on sparking a market panic, and the authors of this bill seem to think that the answer is to create a system to prop up future banks.  It was not the collapse, but rather the surprise involvement and then abandonment by the government, that created market turmoil.
 
Do you understand why one bank might be bailed, but another would be left to collapse?
 
It was all done behind closed doors.  The better lesson learned from the crisis is that we need a predictable, rule-based bankruptcy process rather than an expanded discretionary resolution authority.
 
These bailouts do not incentivize these institutions to minimize their risk, instead they go as far as to privatize their profits while socializing their losses. 

Senator Session’s introduced an amendment, that I cosponsored, to offer hard-working American families a reprieve from footing another financial sector bailout, while also discouraging these companies from continuing the irresponsible practices that got them into trouble in the first place. Again, this amendment was defeated along party lines.

The amendment would have made these companies utilize an enhanced bankruptcy process to ensure that the costs are covered by the financial institutions and their creditors, not the taxpayer.
Additionally, it would have created a new Chapter 14 in the Bankruptcy Code that would utilize many of the tenants of Chapter 11 bankruptcy, but would be for the specific use of these financial institutions. 

This addition to the Bankruptcy Code would have created a new pathway to limit the cascading spread of risk and panic through the financial system and assured the more orderly wind-down of financial institutions- insulated from bailouts and political influence.

Senator Session’s amendment would have delivered much-needed transparency, accountability, stability, and due process through the use of bankruptcy courts.  Further, to protect taxpayers, it specifically denied the federal government the authority to take over firms, dictate the terms of their reorganization or liquidation and support them with federal bailouts.

The amendment guaranteed real reform that would have resulted in real stability. Unfortunately, the Democrats decided to go in a different direction, one that moves away from protecting the taxpayers, and swiftly defeated this bankruptcy amendment. So, what does this mean for the average American?
It means that this financial reform bill does not end “too big to fail” and ensures more taxpayer bailouts with the next financial crisis.
 
Consumer Protection:

In fact, this legislation goes as far as to create unnecessary and burdensome regulatory requirements that will ultimately hurt small businesses. Nowhere is this clearer than the creation of the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB).

This new government bureaucracy will have the authority to write and enforce rules that could ultimately tighten the availability of credit and discourage business investment at a time when we can least afford it. I am deeply concerned about the jurisdictional reach of this new agency.
I was pleased that the Senate adopted my amendment last night that would exempt from the new agency all sellers of nonfinancial goods that give customers the option of making installment payments. 

At a time when the economy has taken its toll on many American families, it is vital that businesses are not discouraged from offering their customers flexible payment options. This is classic overreach by Washington, and I’m glad that my colleagues narrowed the scope of the agency so that we don’t further stunt our country’s economic growth. 

However, my amendment fixes but one problem with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.  This new Bureau has no oversight and has access to billions of dollars.  We’ve seen too often bureaucracies grow and grow normally; that’s simply what bureaucracies do. 

Can you imagine what this monstrosity with no size restriction and no oversight can become?
 
Conclusion/Complexity of bill:

So, I ask you, do you feel like we’re really reforming this financial industry with this legislation?
The purpose of my speech today was to highlight all that is wrong with this bill for the American people, but I ran into a problem when doing this because what’s wrong with the bill is literally every single line in the bill.  I point out the issues of Fannie and Freddie, bailouts versus bankruptcy, because had those amendments been offered to this legislation, they would have been the sole examples of what is right with this financial reform bill; but they were not adopted and were defeated along party lines.

The American people are tired and frankly, so am I.  I’m tired of standing up to speak about real reform, all the while, watching as my colleagues pass massive pieces of legislation through this body as solutions looking for a problem, while continuing to ignore that we have real problems that need real solutions.

This financial reform bill does nothing to address real reform of the financial industry, but it does ensure that the taxpayers guarantee the bad debt of Fannie and Freddie and Wall Street, just as these companies guaranteed bad debt that eventually brought them to their knees.

Is that what we’re waiting for?  Are we going to pass legislation like the sky is falling, but when the sky does actually fall, are we not going to be able to get out from underneath it?  At the rate we’re going, this will become our reality. The economic issues plaguing Greece aren’t just a scary thing to watch unfold on TV, it’s the future of our country, the great United States of America, if we don’t start shaping up.

Rushing legislation through Congress and into law doesn’t mean that we’re addressing pressing issues, it means that we’re passing time and passing unintended consequences on the taxpayers’ dime. We’re passing time that we don’t have, using money that we don’t have, and doing so in a country that can’t afford another bailout or another collapse of another ‘too big to fail’ company.
