U.S. Senator Johnny Isakson, R-Ga., was honored as a "Tax Fighter" by the National Tax Limitation Committee for his strong record as a fiscal conservative in the 111th Congress. The award is given to members of Congress who have consistently voted to lower taxes and reduce federal spending.

"I am very proud to receive this honor from the National Tax Limitation Committee, because I fully support its mission to limit the growth of taxes and spending in order to control the size of government. Our families and small businesses cannot plan their budgets or grow their businesses when the tax bill coming from Washington is uncertain and unpredictable," Isakson said. "As a businessman, I more than recognize that the way the government is operating is not only unsustainable, it is a recipe for disaster and failure."

Isakson received an "A" rating for his record on behalf of taxpayers to stop the passage of the Democrats' health care reform and cap-and-trade legislation, to make the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts permanent, to eliminate the death tax, to kill the Alternative Minimum Tax, to provide incentives for private savings, investment and job creation and to control the growth of federal spending.

Since 1975, the National Tax Limitation Committee, a 501(c)(4) grass roots taxpayer activist organization, has worked to limit taxes and spending and to reduce the size and scope of government at all levels. The organization has led the national movement for constitutional tax and spending limits at the state and federal levels. It publishes a congressional scorecard at the conclusion of each Congress, as it has for more than 25 years.

"We have a serious, difficult problem in our country. One of the keys to stopping the growth of debt and improving the plight of our country is to begin spending within our means," Isakson said.

Isakson is committed to trying to pass legislation to curb federal spending and to demand more accountability from programs that receive federal dollars. Isakson is a co-sponsor of a constitutional amendment that would allow the President to use the line-item veto to either eliminate or reduce appropriations in any bill passed by the Congress. The amendment would also require Congress to balance the federal budget.

Isakson also has introduced legislation to reform the federal budget process by converting it from an annual spending process to a two-year cycle, with one year for appropriating federal dollars and the other year devoted solely to mandatory oversight of federal programs.
