“I have been reliably informed that long-time Republican proponents of my bill to suspend EPA regulations on greenhouse gas emissions have pulled their support for this year – so that they can gain some political advantage trying to take over this issue in 2011,” said Senator Rockefeller.  “Momentum has been building on the Democratic side for my EPA delay bill, but this is of necessity a bipartisan proposal and it cannot proceed without strong Republican support and effort.
 
“Last night, the GOP walked away from West Virginians on the omnibus spending bill that meant critical funding for our families, seniors, soldiers and veterans.  Then and now, Republicans also are walking away from every coal and manufacturing state in this country by not working with me to pass EPA-suspension legislation before the end of the year.
 
“I have long maintained that the Congress, the elected voice of the people – and not the unelected EPA – must decide major economic and energy policy. The EPA simply doesn’t have the right tools or bureaucratic instinct to prevent economic harm in West Virginia and protect our nation’s jobs.  The EPA regulations that take effect starting in January offer questionable greenhouse gas reductions at the expense of business certainty and economic growth – and I know we can do better.
 
“In the face of a January launch date, I think it is irresponsible to wait any longer – we must call a timeout on these regulations.  But let me make clear, I will be back fighting hard for my two-year bill as my first order of business in the new Congress.  In West Virginia and in other coal states across the country, our future is at stake.
 
“Finally, I want to thank Senator Lisa Murkowski for her continued strong commitment to this bill.”
 
Background
 
Senator Rockefeller’s EPA suspension legislation will allow two years for Congress to consider energy legislation in lieu of EPA greenhouse gas regulations schedule to take effect on January 2, 2011. The Rockefeller bill directs that for two years after enactment the EPA may take no action to make stationary sources of carbon dioxide or methane emission, such as power plants, refineries, and manufacturing facilities, subject to permitting requirements or New Source Performance Standards under the Clean Air Act.  The legislation allows continued implementation of widely-supported motor vehicle emission standards.
 
Last evening, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid announced that the Senate no longer had the necessary 60 votes to begin consideration of the FY 2011 Omnibus Appropriations bill, as a result of nine Republican Senators reversing their previous intentions to support the measure.    Majority Leader Reid and Minority Leader Mitch McConnell are now working out the terms of another short-term Continuing Resolution to keep the government operating.  The omnibus included funding for our health care workforce and public education system, supported our nation’s homeless veterans, and provided vital funding to support the health and safety of our hardworking miners, as well as nearly $200 million for West Virginia programs that Senator Rockefeller worked to secure after the passing of Senator Byrd.  
 
Senator Rockefeller was a strong supporter of the Omnibus Appropriations bill and had announced his intention to offer an amendment to improve it by adding his EPA-suspension legislation.  Senator Rockefeller filed the EPA-suspension legislation as an amendment to the underlying Continuing Resolution yesterday, but was informed today by supporters of his bill that previous Republican supporters would not agree to take action on the bill until next year.
