Washington, D.C.—Senator Jay Rockefeller issued the following statement on today’s vote on the middle-class tax cuts:

“Our most important tasks right now are to help hard-working Americans and get this economy back on track.  I think extending the tax cuts for families up to the $250,000 threshold, coupled with extending unemployment insurance, is the best approach.  It provides needed relief to nearly 99 percent of West Virginians and pumps more money into the economy, but does so in a way that is fiscally responsible.  In my judgment, the top 1-2 percent simply don’t need another tax break that the country can’t afford right now.
 
“I’m sorely disappointed that we didn’t pass a final bill today because people are hurting, unemployment benefits have expired, and families need to know they can make it through the winter. But I also believe that if all sides keep at it, we can work together find a solution – we cannot end the session without fixing this.”

Background:

Senator Rockefeller voted in support of and cosponsored the legislation to protect Middle Class families from higher taxes.
 
The legislation failed in the U.S. Senate. The U.S. House of Representatives passed permanent tax relief for families making less than $250,000 on December 2, 2010 by a vote of 234-188.

According to information released by the Senate Finance Committee, The Middle-Class Tax Cut Act of 2010 would also help create jobs by extending critical tax cuts for individuals, families and employers. The bill would provide families with greater tax certainty by maintaining low rates and by reducing the number of Americans required to pay the Alternative Minimum Tax for the next two years.  According to the IRS, 785,966 West Virginians filed taxes in 2008. This bill would protect over 99% of all taxpayers from a tax increase, including over 52,000 West Virginia families who will be protected by patching the Alternative Minimum Tax and over 14,000 West Virginia families who will be helped by continuing enhancements in the Earned Income Tax Credit.
 
The legislation will also improve confidence for investors by creating identical, permanent tax rates for income from capital gains and dividendsfor taxpayers under $250,000, which protects a significant number of West Virginia’s small businesses.
 
If federal unemployment benefits are not extended, over 10,000 West Virginians will lose benefits this month, and more people over time.
 
Click here for a summary of legislation (LINK).
