October 1st, 2010 - WASHINGTON, DC - Senator Tim Johnson (D-SD), Senator John Thune (R-SD), and Congresswoman Stephanie Herseth Sandlin (D-SD) announced today that South Dakota young people interested in being nominated to one of the four U.S. Service Academies for the Class of 2015 should apply by October 31, 2010. 

South Dakota residents between the ages of 17 and 23 may apply to any of the four service academies if they meet eligibility requirements in leadership, physical aptitude, scholarship and character. The four service academies are the Military Academy at West Point, New York; the Naval Academy at Annapolis, Maryland; the Air Force Academy at Colorado Springs, Colorado; and the Merchant Marine Academy at Kings Point, New York. 

"Some of the best students in the country receive appointments to our service academies, and I am proud to nominate South Dakotans," Johnson said. "It is inspiring each year to see young people in our state who want to serve our country and I encourage those interested to apply." 

"Our nation's service academies have inspired many South Dakota men and women to become leaders who serve their country with honor and distinction," said Thune. "I enjoy the opportunity to recommend some of South Dakota's finest students for appointment to the service academies." 

"Our nation's service academies provide an excellent education to qualified young men and women who want to serve their country," Rep. Herseth Sandlin said. "I look forward to recommending some of our state's best and brightest students this year." 

Johnson, Thune, and Herseth Sandlin will each compile separate lists and make nominations to the academies of the most qualified candidates by January 31, 2011. Applicants are encouraged to submit applications to all three Congressional offices in order to better their chances of receiving a nomination. The academies will make the final decision on acceptance and announce appointments next spring. 

Interested applicants should contact: 

Senator Johnson's office at (605) 332-8896; Senator Thune's office at (605) 334-9596; Congresswoman Herseth Sandlin's office at (605) 367-8371.
