Washington, D.C.—Senator Jay Rockefeller today decried the decision by the Senate to block seniors, disabled veterans and people with disabilities from receiving a check for $250 in lieu of the cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) from the Social Security Administration.  By law, the Social Security COLA is based on consumer price index (CPI). This index has not increased during the past two years.  The Senate voted against proceeding with the measure, preventing over 450,000 West Virginians from receiving checks for $250.

“Our economy is struggling and many of our Social Security recipients are on a fixed income – it is wrong that some are being forced to choose between paying for food at the grocery store and heating their homes this winter,” said Senator Rockefeller. “I know that many people rely on their cost-of-living increase to help make ends meet, and this check would have meant a great deal to people in West Virginia and across the country. The Senate was wrong to block this action, and I will keep fighting to make sure we do whatever possible to help those struggling this holiday season.”

The Social Security Administration recently announced that the CPI did not increase so there would not be a cost-of-living adjustment increase in 2011, for the second year in a row. Disabled veterans and payments to people with disabilities are also linked to the Social Security COLA.   
Background:
 
A law was passed decades ago to provide an automatic COLA each year based on the Consumer Price Index (CPI) to protect the value of Social Security benefits from the erosion of inflation. The CPI measures the price of goods and services commonly purchased by a certain cross-section of households and computes whether prices have gone up or down. The formula that the Social Security Administration uses provides that Social Security benefits will not be increased unless the CPI shows that prices are higher than they were the last time there was a COLA, which is usually the prior year.
