I rise, first, to associate myself with the words of the Senator from Georgia. He is absolutely correct in his history of how Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae got started, what their purpose was and the fact that they are a great idea that went awry. I also want to rise to support Senator McCain’s proposal, because what he is suggesting is a way out of a very deep and dark hole of debt for our nation and the American taxpayers, which is being generated by the legacy and the present activities of Freddie and Fannie.

The part of this amendment that I played a role in primarily, is the issue of bringing on budget and, therefore, into the light of the day, just how much the American taxpayers owe as a result of the situation that has occurred in those two businesses. It is estimated that the American taxpayer will end up picking up somewhere around $400 billion to $500 billion in costs as a result of the activities of Freddie and Fannie. As far as the American taxpayer knows, this will be something that comes out of the sky. Nobody is aware of it, nobody is thinking about it and nobody is talking about it.  These are actual debts that are going to get put on our books, which will affect our credit worthiness as a nation, and which all Americans will have to pay back.

Why is this going to happen? It's going to happen because during the days of taking on mortgage debt obligations which weren't properly underwritten.  They were securitized and, for all intents and purposes, backed up by Fannie and Freddie.  There will be a later amendment by Senator Corker which I will support in the area of underwriting.  So you ended up with a situation where Fannie and Freddie own a lot of paper which doesn’t have the value it was supposed to have and which isn’t being paid back at the rate at which it is supposed to be paid back. Unfortunately, there was a tacit understanding that arose in the markets that the American taxpayer was going to stand behind that paper. Now, this was never explicit, but it became tacit, and people expected that backing. When the actual event occurred and these defaults started to accelerate, it became real and the American taxpayer now has to stand behind all this debt. It's certainly going to come as a shock to most Americans that they owe approximately half a trillion dollars because of very bad decisions that were made by a group of people who were underwriting and basically securitizing these loans.

Why did that happen? While there will be a lot of recriminations for this, the basic reason was the United States Congress. The Congress decided that Americans should own houses -- whether they could afford the house or whether the house sustained the value of the loan, Americans should be able to go out and buy houses. Because of this, a lot of houses were sold which did not have the underlying value necessary to support the loan made on them; as well as situations where the purchaser who took out the mortgage didn't have the income over the period of the loan to pay it back.

Everybody knew it at the time that the house was bought. Everybody knew it at the time the mortgage was made. But they figured, “Well, appreciation will always occur in real estate prices, so that won't bother us with the value of the house. And, well, maybe this person who got the loan for the house, maybe their income will increase or when the reset day occurs on that mortgage, they'll be able to take care of it some other way.” Because of this mentality, nobody faced up to the problem. At the time, millions of homes were purchased under that basic scenario. That is basically what caused the implosion of our financial markets back in late 2008, and Freddie and Fannie were a large part of that implosion.

A lot of the initiative for that mentality came from the Congress basically asserting that people should be able to get those types of loans and pushing Freddie and Fannie away from using what had been very traditional underwriting standards in the 1990's into much more aggressive standards as they moved into the early 2000-2001 period. As a result you had a proliferation of loans that didn't have the underlying value or have the capacity to be repaid, and they were all securitized by Fannie and Freddie.

So now the American taxpayer ends up with this huge bill. And, I think we have an obligation as a Congress to at least be honest with the American taxpayer and tell them this is how big the bill is- and it's huge.

This bill is now hidden in a drawer in the federal accounting system, where we don't even acknowledge that it exists under the federal budget. Even though we know we owe it, we know that it's going to be put on the books of the federal government, and we know that the American taxpayer is going to have to pay this bill in the long run, we don't even acknowledge it. It's hidden in some drawer somewhere here in Washington. Well, that shouldn't happen any longer.

We just had an amendment about transparency with the Federal Reserve. Everybody voted for the transparency bill on Federal Reserve. This is the transparency bill on Freddie and Fannie. This bill will tell the American taxpayer just how much they really owe. It will bring on budget the issue of the debts of these two corporations, which are now the obligations of the federal government and, therefore, the American taxpayer. This absolutely has to be done.

I thank the Senator from Arizona for including in his amendment this language which brings Fannie and Freddie on budget the way they should be.  This will open the issue to the light of day so that the American taxpayer can understand just how much risk and debt have been piled on their backs as a result of the irresponsible activity, which in large part was initiated by this Congress over the years by pushing a public policy that these loans should be made.

I also congratulate the Senator from Arizona for bringing forward a proposal for how we unwind and get out of this situation by putting us on a path toward basically decoupling Freddie and Fannie from the American taxpayer so that those two organizations are no longer dependent on the American taxpayer.  And, the American taxpayer will no longer be responsible for the debts caused by the mistakes made by those two corporations -- even when those mistakes were caused, to some significant degree, by the poor policy actions of Congress. So I congratulate the Senator from Arizona for what I think is a good amendment.

As has been said, “How can you take up financial reform if you don't take up the two largest entities that affect the financial markets relative to real estate lending in this country, which is what caused the downturn and crisis at the end of 2008?” You can't do it. You can't claim you've done financial reform if you don't address this issue.

I understand that the Administration says, “Well, we'll do it next year.” Well, we don't have time. We need to address this now. It's a critical issue, and it's at the essence of whether we can get our fiscal house right and our ducks in a row relative to financial reform. Because if you don't straighten out Freddie and Fannie and their relationship to the federal government, specifically their relationship to the American taxpayer, you really haven't done anything to solve the long-term problems of how we get our fiscal house in order. The issue of how you make real estate loans in this country is at the core of how you correct the financial structure of this country.

This amendment coupled with the amendment that's coming from Senator Corker on the issue of underwriting, are the two key amendments to this bill which address the two elements which were not addressed by this bill but which have to be addressed if we're going to have effective, comprehensive, lasting and meaningful reform. Mr. President, I yield the floor.
