Mr. President, I wish to join in congratulating Senator Corker, Senator Isakson, Senator Shelby and others who have come together around this issue of creating better underwriting standards. It's hard for me to understand why this would be resisted in this bill, because as has been outlined both by Senator Corker and by Senator Isakson, it really was underwriting that created the problems which led our nation to the brink of a fiscal collapse.

The way that I describe it is that we had an inverted pyramid. You had a situation where an individual or a corporation made a loan to another individual based on the value of a piece of property. Unfortunately, when that loan was made, it was made in a way where nobody really looked at the value of the property relative to the loan. Nobody looked at whether or not the person who was getting the loan could pay it back. The system no longer had strong underwriting standards. That loan was then syndicated, securitized, synthesized and it became multiplied, as the Senator from Tennessee said, into $600 trillion of notional value. We ended up with this huge pyramid of debt, built on the basis of this loan down here at the bottom of it, between this corporation and this individual. The loan that was based on value that wasn't there and on ability to repay which wasn't there, once the rates of the loan were reset.

Why did this happen? Why was this loan so inappropriately made? It was inappropriately made because we had a breakdown in underwriting standards. I’ve been through three of these events in my professional career: once in the late 1970's when I was involved in representing a bank in New Hampshire, once in the late 1980's when I was Governor of New Hampshire, and now. These three major financial disruptions which were created almost entirely by a failure in underwriting standards, where people were making loans that couldn't be paid back based on asset value that wasn't there. It was aggravated radically this time because of the way the system suddenly took these loans and exploded them through the securitization process and the syndication process.

If you're going to fix this problem, if you're going to put in place a regulatory reform system which actually fixes the issues which caused the crisis, you've got to address underwriting standards. And that is why the Corker amendment is so critical because this bill does not address underwriting standards in any other significant manner.

If you're going to have a legitimate effort to try to make sure this type of event doesn't occur again, you've got to put in place underwriting standards that establish the rules of the road and say that, in the future, America will not allow this sort of proliferation of lending that is not properly secured and where we know that the person getting a loan can't repay the obligation.

Ironically in this situation, these loans were made in some instances with the full understanding that they couldn't be repaid and the value wasn't there. Why? Because we separated underwriting standards from the process of actually making the loan. People making the loans were only interested in the fee, they weren't interested in whether the value of the security was there and they weren't interested whether the person getting the money from the loan could repay it. They were just interested in the fee. Well, this should stop.

The language Senator Corker put forward would accomplish that. It would put in place not new or unusual underwriting standards. It would essentially go back to the type of standards which we had when we didn't have this type of risk in the marketplace because people knew that when they borrowed money to buy a house, they were going to have to put money down. And if they didn't put the full amount of the value down, they were going to have to have insurance to cover the difference. They knew that their credit worthiness was going to be thoroughly checked, and their ability to pay the loan back was going to be checked. It is a totally reasonable approach.

If you're going to do one thing in this bill to avoid a future event such as what we confronted in 2008 where the financial industry in this country almost melted down, you should adopt the Corker amendment. I don't understand any opposition to it. I don't understand the concept of opposing it because it is basically good banking and good lending. It is also good for the people who are borrowing the money because they're not going to just get money arbitrarily but only if they have the value and the asset they're borrowing on and if they have the ability to repay it. I certainly hope this amendment will be approved.
