United States Senator Kay R. Hagan (D-NC) today announced that 34 municipal governments, community colleges and school districts in North Carolina will receive $4.5 million to reduce fuel and utility bills and create jobs. The Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grants (EECBG) are part of a second wave of funding to local agencies in North Carolina through the Recovery Act.

"In this tough economy, these grants will help local governments and schools across the state upgrade aging infrastructure -- benefitting our communities into the future," Hagan said. "I will continue working to secure federal dollars for important projects that reduce energy costs for North Carolinians and create jobs in our state."

The grants will be used to upgrade heat pumps, install energy efficient lighting and solar water heating, and upgrade heating and cooling systems in communities and agencies.

The towns of Taylorsville, Plymouth, Castalia, Craven County schools, Duck, Parmele, and Windsor for example, will receive a total of $406,564 through the funding.

"As a small town manager working with very limited revenues, this grant will prove to be very helpful as a majority of the Town's buildings are over 50 years old," said Taylorsville Town Manager David Odom. "These funds will provide needed repairs and allow the town to reduce its energy consumption, treat waste water more efficiently, and pass these savings on to our citizens."

"I am thankful for the leadership Senator Hagan has provided, she and her fine staff are always open, responsive, and attentive to the needs of Rural North Carolina," he said, "The Infrastructure of Taylorsville, North Carolina continues to improve due to the tireless efforts of Senator Kay Hagan."

The EECBG program is administered by the North Carolina Energy Office, part of the state's Department of Commerce, to encourage energy conservation and economic investment in counties, municipalities, community colleges and public schools.

The following additional grants have been awarded to NC towns:

 Brunswick County/Boiling Spring Lakes -- $170,024 upgrade to energy efficient lighting and install room occupancy sensors.
 Caldwell Community College -- $301,701 to upgrade lighting to dimmable LED and install direct digital controls for building energy consumption automation.
 Cleveland Community College -- $227,853 to upgrade to energy efficient lighting.
 Davidson County Community College and Davidson County Public Schools -- $179,832 total to upgrade lighting in a gym and install a more energy efficient chiller.
 Gastonia (Gaston County) -- $257,227 to upgrade to more energy efficient lighting and heating and cooling systems.
 Graham (Alamance County) - $102,553 to upgrade lighting, add programmable thermostats, weatherize and install room occupancy sensors.
 Guilford Technical Community College -- $109,000 to upgrade lighting and heating and cooling systems.
 Halifax Community College -- $219,093 to upgrade to energy efficient lighting.
 Jones County/Jones County Schools -- $403,164 to upgrade lighting, install energy efficient motors and remote energy consumption monitors and controls.
 Kernersville (Forsyth County) -- $497,869 to improve heating and cooling systems, improve lighting and water consumption efficiency.
 Lee County Schools, Knightdale, Wayne County -- $413,544 total to improve lighting efficiency, upgrade heating and cooling systems and install energy efficient motors for public swimming facilities.
 Lexington (Davidson County) -- $172,921 to replace air conditioning units and motors.∙ Martin Community College/Williamston -- $106,378 to upgrade to energy efficient lighting and heating and air conditioning and other improvements.
 Piedmont Community College (Person County) -- $187,794 to install room occupancy sensors, lighting timers, heating and cooling improvements and weatherization.
 Wake Forest (and 6 other communities) -- $495,506 total to upgrade heating and air conditioning, retrofit lighting, improve weatherization and install solar panels in seven communities and agencies including Wake Forest, Apex and Morrisville.
 Washington (Beaufort County) -- $259,979 to upgrade lighting, install direct gas-fired air heating systems and ventilation timers.
