U.S. Senator Kay R. Hagan (D-NC) is working to protect small producers from new government regulations in the Food Safety Modernization Act. The Senate passed a key procedural hurdle on the bill today by a vote of 74 to 25, and will likely begin voting on amendments to the bill this week. Hagan has cosponsored a small producer amendment with Senator Jon Tester (D-MT), who is a farmer, to ensure they are protected from excessive government regulations.

"The food safety bill imposes federal regulations on the smallest food producers, including family farms, that produce products, like homemade jams and jellies, to sell at the farmer's market or the local food co-op," Hagan said. "I visited one of these farmers markets in September in Asheville, and the local producers were very concerned about how they would be able to afford these proposed regulations. Senator Tester and I are working together this week to amend the bill to allow small producers to continue being regulated at the state and local level."

The Tester-Hagan amendment protects small producers who sell directly to restaurants and consumers from new FDA performance requirements. Small producers would continue to be regulated at the state and local level.

Hagan also included a provision in the bill to help farmers who suffer losses due to erroneous recalls. For instance, North Carolina tomato growers suffered when the Food and Drug Administration mistakenly cited tomatoes following a salmonella outbreak when the problem turned out to be a pepper farm in Mexico. Consumer demand for tomatoes dropped 50 to 60 percent. Hagan's provision will require the government to evaluate ways to appropriately compensate farmers when a recall is determined to be erroneous.

Agriculture is North Carolina's largest industry, generating $74 billion in economic activity and employing nearly one-fifth of the state's workers.

"We need to encourage growth in the agriculture industry, not stifle it," Hagan said. "I am committed to protecting the livelihoods of our farmers."

"When we deal something as critical as the safety and viability of our nation's food supply, it's important to work together to do what's right for all of our food producers," said Tester, a third-generation farmer from north-central Montana. "As we move forward in debating this bill, I stand with our country's family-scale food producers. This amendment will make sure that they remain an important part of our food system in Montana and across America."
