United States Senator Kay R. Hagan (D-NC) today issued a statement on a letter the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) sent to the Department of the Navy clarifying the ATSDR's position on the 2009 National Research Council (NRC) report. Late last week, the ATSDR released its own report, the first in a series focusing on the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

Hagan said:
"I am extremely encouraged by ATSDR's letter to the Department of the Navy. The 2009 National Research Council (NRC) report on Camp Lejeune had significant shortcomings, and failed to identify all contaminants present in Camp Lejeune's drinking water such as benzene and vinyl chloride. The report also failed to provide an accurate picture of the adverse health effects associated with exposure. The report has become a major stumbling block for Veterans attempting to receive VA benefits associated with their exposures at Camp Lejeune. This faulty report should not be used to determined benefits for our veterans. I look forward to continue working with the Department of the Navy and the Marine Corps to provide closure to our former Lejeune families."

On Tuesday, Oct. 5, Hagan met with the ATSDR Chief Administrator Dr. Christopher Portier, to discuss concerns over the 2009 NRC report. Dr. Portier is in charge of investigating the link between water contamination at Camp Lejeune and the health problems of Marines and their families. The ATSDR addressed those concerns in a letter sent to the Department of the Navy today. A copy of the letter can be found here: http://hagan.senate.gov/files/Schregardus_Panter_10-22-10.pdf

The Department of Veterans Affairs is currently using the NRC report as a basis to determine benefits associated with exposure to water contamination at Camp Lejeune. 

The 1997 public health assessment by the ATSDR stated that Marines and their families faced little or no cancer risk from drinking and bathing in ground water at Camp Lejeune that was chemically-tainted by TCE and PCE. However, last year the ATSDR, which is a scientific research agency under the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), said it could no longer stand by parts of its assessment due to data inaccuracies and the omission of other contaminants, such as benzene.

Senators Hagan and Richard Burr (R-NC) included a key amendment in this year's Defense Authorization Bill that requires the Navy to assist the ATSDR in completing the new reports. Hagan also included a provision that prevents the Navy from disposing of water contamination claims before the new ATSDR studies are completed. The full Senate must still consider the Defense Authorization bill.
