A new study by the General Accounting Office (GAO) found the Army’s justification for increasing and expanding their European bases to be “inaccurate” and “flawed,” said U.S. Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison (R-TX), who has called for a “build in America” strategy for America’s future military construction agenda and forces’ security posture. Sen. Hutchison is the Ranking Member of the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Military Construction.

The GAO report released on September 13, concluded that the analysis used by the Army to justify keeping the forces in Europe was seriously flawed and that the additional cost to taxpayers could reach $2 billion.
“At the end of the Cold War, the U.S. military determined that our armed forces would be best trained and equipped to deploy for service when stationed on U.S. soil. This strategy was affirmed by the Overseas Basing Commission in 2005, and Congress supported this strategy by committing more than $14 billion to build up our housing, training and deployment facilities at our stateside bases,” Sen. Hutchison noted. “However, this year, the Department of Defense’s military construction proposal shifts away from this strategy and would set in motion a major expansion of our overseas bases.”
Sen. Hutchison called the DoD’s sudden shift in strategy “troubling” and raised her concerns to Defense Secretary Robert Gates.
“Our troops must have access to training areas where they can maneuver freely, conduct live-fire exercises and work with night-vision devices. Many overseas locations prohibit or severely restrict such intensive, and needed, training. In addition, deployments can become more complicated from overseas locations. U.S. forces deploying from Germany to Iraq were denied of ground and air routes through several European nations. We have proved we can best deploy from U.S. bases—and we can do it more cost effectively,” Sen. Hutchison said. “We must not place limitations on our troops, while taxing our citizens unnecessarily.”
Sen. Hutchison has indicated that she will introduce amendments to next year’s Defense Authorization bill to cut $1 billion in overseas military construction funding, mostly in Germany. She is particularly concerned that some of the proposals would create duplicate headquarters at several locations in Germany.
“At a time when we need American jobs, the Defense Department’s proposed projects create thousands of foreign jobs that will require continuous taxpayer funding to maintain the facilities. The GAO has also found serious problems with their new plans, saying they lack credible analysis, cost efficiency and strategic direction,” Sen. Hutchison said. “I call on the Pentagon to heed the concerns raised in the GAO report and to work with Congress to ensure that we safeguard our taxpayers and support our forces’ readiness.”
