Senator Kent Conrad today convened an official field hearing of the Senate Budget Committee to hear from North Dakota agriculture producers and Renville County farmers about their priorities for the next Farm Bill.
 
“Though it seems like we just wrapped up the last Farm Bill, meetings and negotiations are already underway in preparation for the next one,” Senator Conrad said. “Establishing common objectives and priorities early on will give us an advantage once formal negotiations begin. That is why today’s hearing is a critically important step to what we hope will be another Farm Bill that benefits North Dakota’s families and producers.”
 
The meeting in Mohall kicks off a series of Agriculture-related community meetings and official budget committee hearings that Senator Conrad will hold across North Dakota in the coming months. The purpose of these meetings will be to set in place a list of priorities prior to formal negotiations on the next Farm Bill.
 
To illustrate the importance of a good Farm Bill for Mohall families, Senator Conrad noted that Renville County produced of seven million bushels of barley that helped account for $150 million in crop and livestock sales in 2008.
 
Statewide, the Senator said North Dakota leads the nation in the production of 15 different crops, with $7.3 billion in agriculture production from the state’s 32,000 farms.
 
Among those testifying at today’s hearing were: North Dakota Farmers Union President Robert Carlson, North Dakota Barley Council Executive Director Steve Edwardson, U.S. Durum Growers Association President Larry Neubauer, Glenburn farmer Scott Backes, and National Sunflower Association Director Jeff Oberholtzer.        
 
Senator Conrad noted that the 2008 Farm Bill is widely viewed as a significant success for the state due largely to the fact that North Dakota was well represented when the final decisions were made. North Dakota receives more per capita from agriculture programs in the Farm Bill than any other state as a direct result of the committee assignments and seniority of Congressman Pomeroy and Senator Conrad.
 
“From securing permanent disaster assistance to improved commodity support and an energy title that benefits North Dakota’s producers, the 2008 Farm Bill was a huge victory for our state in part because Congressman Pomeroy, Senator Dorgan and I were at the table,” Senator Conrad said.
