Senator Kent Conrad today got a firsthand look at how a $14 million federal infrastructure investment will improve the efficiency of transporting goods into and out of Minot’s Great Plains Energy Park, the Port of North Dakota Intermodal Rail Facility and the Value-Added Agriculture Park.

"Moving goods to market is always a big challenge. When you complicate matters with a rail line disrupting the flow of traffic into and out of the park, you have gridlock,” Senator Conrad said. “This new bypass to improve the movement of freight and goods in the area is just  the latest example of smart, targeted investments the federal government has made to improve the economic condition of North Dakota.”

Earlier this month, Congressman Earl Pomeroy and Senators Conrad and Byron Dorgan announced that the U.S. Department of Transportation has awarded a $14.13 million Transportation Investment Generating Economic Recovery (TIGER)  grant to support the Minot Bypass project. 

Area officials – including Mayor Curt Zimbleman, Ward County Chairman Bruce Christianson and Minot Area Development Council CEO Jerry Chavez – say the Minot Bypass project will boost the region’s manufacturing and agricultural sectors. In the last four years, North Dakota has experienced a 46 percent increase in manufacturing. Efficient truck access is key to continue this growth. The Minot Bypass project will improve movement of trucks and freight through Minot to help get export crops to national and global markets.  Improving truck and rail access to these critical facilities will reduce congestion in Minot and cut down on travel and wait times which will lower operating costs.

Senator Conrad said the grant will be used to reconstruct an intersection at the junction of US 2 and 55th St NE; construct a grade separation over Burlington Northern's mainline and service tracks; and upgrade existing county and township roads to serve as a segment of the NE bypass.

The large increase in oil production west of Minot has resulted in the need for the development of rail facilities for oil loading.  The Minot oil facility has the ability to receive and ship 30,000 barrels of oil per day, equivalent to 136 truckloads.  The improvements proposed as a part of this project allow the facility to expand its capacity. 

North Dakota’s congressional delegation had previously secured $2.8 million for the bypass through Transportation legislation. 

TIGER grants were originally created as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.
