Senator Kent Conrad helped open the new U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) community-based outpatient clinic in Dickinson today. The Senator cut the ceremonial ribbon and called the new 3,000 square-foot facility a step toward better health care for North Dakota's rural veterans. 
 
“Today is a culmination of months of hard work to ensure our veterans continue to have access to quality health care," Senator Conrad said.  "We fought for years to bring a clinic to Dickinson in order to dramatically reduce driving distances and wait times for veterans living in rural areas, and this new contract and new building will ensure our veterans have easy access to the vital care they need and deserve.” 
 
Last May, the Great Plains Clinic decided not to renew its contract with the VA, leaving approximately 800 veterans in Stark County without timely access to health care. Veterans were forced to travel hundreds of miles to Bismarck or South Dakota for primary care. 
 
Senator Conrad along with Congressman Earl Pomeroy and Senator Byron Dorgan worked with local officials to press the VA to find a new partner company and preserve the access to care that veterans in the Dickinson area need and deserve. The effort yielded a new contract between the VA and Virginia-based CRAssociates.
 
The new health center has four exam rooms and offers comprehensive primary care, including mental health services, disease prevention and maintenance, telehealth services, routine procedures and health education.
 
Senator Conrad also presented the clinic's staff with an American flag he had flown over the U.S. Capitol in honor of the new Dickinson health facility and all the veterans it will care for. 
 
The Dickinson clinic is one in a series of new outpatient clinics the Congressional delegation fought to open in North Dakota over the past several years. The VA currently operates clinics in Grafton, Minot, Williston, Jamestown, Minot, Grand Forks and Bismarck. 
 
"Our veterans have made significant sacrifices for all of us, and we need to fulfill our obligation to ensure they have access to top-quality health care in return,” Senator Conrad said.
