 Congressman Earl Pomeroy and Senators Kent Conrad and Byron Dorgan announced today that the U.S. Department of Transportation has awarded $14.1 million in federal funding to support the Minot Bypass project, officially known as the North Central Regional Economic Growth Intermodal Port Connector project. This funding is on top of $2.8 million the delegation previously secured for the Minot project through the annual transportation appropriations bill.
 
The federal funding announced today will be used specifically to reconstruct an intersection at the junction of US 2 and 55th St NE; construct a grade separation over Burlington Northern's mainline and service tracks; and upgrade existing county and township roads to serve as a segment of the NE bypass.
 
"This is great news. We have been pressing Secretary LaHood to grant this funding. Business is booming in Western North Dakota, and one of the biggest challenges is moving goods to market. This funding will provide for the infrastructure upgrades necessary to move more oil, manufactured goods, and commodities out of Western North Dakota to markets around the world," the delegation said in a joint statement.
 
The North Central Regional Economic Growth Intermodal Port Connector project includes completing a bypass around the city of Minot and a railroad grade separation, which will improve movement into and out of the city’s value added ag park as well as the the Great Plains Energy Park, the Port of North Dakota Intermodel rail facility and Burlington Northern’s rail complex. 
 
The Minot oil facility, which is located at the intermodal facility, has the ability to receive and ship 30,000 barrels of oil per day, equivalent to 136 truckloads. With the improvements proposed as a part of the Minot Bypass project, the facility will be positioned to dramatically expand its capacity. 
 
In addition to benefitting the energy industry, the Minot Bypass project would aid both the manufacturing and agricultural sectors.   In the last four years, North Dakota has experienced a 46 percent increase in manufacturing. Efficient truck access is key to continue this growth. The Minot Bypass project will improve movement of trucks and freight through Minot to help get producers export crops to national and global markets.
