In just a few short weeks we will celebrate our nation's birthday.
 
I find it ironic that 234 years after our forefathers first led the fight for independence with the battle cry of “no taxation without representation,” I’m hearing similar protests from Missourians. Their frustration is not only understandable, it is warranted.
 
Missourians – and Americans in every state across our nation – have said NO more!  They have said no to runaway spending – they have said NO to more big government policies. Failing to represent these views, the Majority in Congress has fallen down on the job.
 
It is no wonder that Americans feel like Washington is not listening  since my friends on the other side of the aisle are asking us to ignore our nation's 13 trillion debt; the largest in our nation’s history, and pass a bill that adds nearly ANOTHER $79 billion dollars to the deficit.
 
There's a better way – there is a more responsible way.
 
My colleague from South Dakota, Senator Thune, has offered a substitute amendment that is paid for, cuts the deficit by $68 billion dollars and includes all of the major priorities agreed to by both Democrats and Republicans.
 
In the Thune Substitute, which I am proud to cosponsor, we have a real opportunity to show the American people that Washington is listening. We have an opportunity to show the American people that we are serious about addressing the most severe financial crisis this country has ever faced. And we have an opportunity for a rare moment of bipartisanship – which in recent years has become all too uncommon in this body.
 
Just like the proposal from Senator Baucus, the Republican alternative extends expiring unemployment benefits for struggling families until November.  And just like the Baucus bill the Republican alternative extends tax breaks to small businesses – who we so desperately need to create new jobs – to assure them the longstanding tax benefits they depend on will continue.
 
However, unlike the Baucus bill which the Majority is using as a vehicle to increase taxes permanently, increase spending and increase the deficit, the Republican alternative cuts taxes even more by an additional $26 billion, cuts spending by over $100 billion and, according to the Congressional Budget Office, reduces the deficit by $68 billion – instead of increasing it.
 
The Thune Amendment also stops the cuts to doctors and provides a 2 percent increase in Medicare reimbursement payments to doctors this year and an additional 2 percent in 2011 and 2012. That’s one more year than the doctor fix in Baucus bill and it’s actually paid for!
 
I have heard from doctors across Missouri and they can no longer face these devastating cuts that threaten their livelihood and threaten our seniors’ access to care. It perplexes me that the Majority did not address this problem in what they tell us is a comprehensive health care law.
  
Something else that was largely left out of the new health care law was malpractice reform. The Thune Amendment corrects this oversight and enacts comprehensive medical malpractice reform that saves up to $49 billion over ten years.
 
My friend from Montana, Senator Baucus, takes the opposite approach. The bill that he and the Majority Leader are asking us to support increases spending by $126 billion includes over $70 billion in new and permanent tax increases  and will increase the deficit by $79 billion over the next ten years.
 
The Baucus/Reid bill is exactly the kind of approach that history has told us won’t work and that the American people have told us they don’t want.
 
The American people have had it with Washington-Gone-Wild-policies. They have had enough of the spending, the tax increases, the debt, the bailouts, and the big-government, job-killing policies of the majority in the Congress and the Obama Administration.
 
 
Today, the Republican Alternative offers the Majority an opportunity to reverse course; to end the out of control spending and get serious about fiscal responsibility.
 
When facing a crisis this serious, words mean very little. To say you are concerned about the debt while voting to increase it means very little to our children and grandchildren who will be left to foot the bill.
 
As the old country western song goes: We need a little less talk and lot more action!
 
The Thune amendment offers us a real chance to bring sanity back Washington policies and for members of this body to show the American people that they are serious about addressing our growing deficit.
 
I urge my colleagues to join me in supporting the Thune Amendment and after months of ignoring them, finally demonstrate to the American people that they are listening.
