Madam/Mr. President –
 
Americans have sent a clear message to Washington – they have had enough of the runaway spending, the exploding debt, the bailouts, and the job-killing policies coming out of this Congress and Administration. 
 
Unfortunately, with the bill on the floor now it is clear that much of Washington has stopped listening to the American people.
 
This bill is supposed to be about giving job creators some certainty that the temporary tax benefits they rely on to retain workers will continue to be there.   Instead, it seems Democrats cannot resist the opportunity to use this bill to expand the debt and extend the government reach.  
 
Because this $126 billion bill does all of the above – it’s loaded up with unrelated spending that has nothing to do with extending necessary benefits and creating jobs.
 
This extenders bill is not fully paid for and would add another $78.7 billion to the debt.
 
And with the national debt at a now whopping $13 trillion the American people have said ENOUGH.
 
That’s right – our debt is now at an unprecedented $13 trillion – for the first time in history.
 
This is no small milestone – make no mistake – the next crisis our nation must deal with is the exploding debt crisis that is upon us.
 
Now, I support the provisions in this bill that would give our small businesses – our job creators – the security that longstanding tax benefits they are counting on will continue.
 
I also support extending necessary benefits.
 
But – and this is a big but – the difference is I don’t think that we should pay for temporary tax extensions with permanent tax increases and I want to pay for the extension of necessary benefits now, not saddle our children and grandchildren with even more debt down the road.
 
I believe many of my colleagues on this side of the aisle agree.  Like me, many Republicans support some of the provisions buried in this boondoggle of a bill.
 
In fact, many of these provisions would easily sail through the Senate – but the Democrats continue to bury these provisions in massive spending bills like the one before us – compelling anyone who cares about our nation’s fiscal health to vote no.
 
Americans are demanding that we say no – that we put an end to the Washington-Gone-Wild policies.  They have had enough of the spending, the tax increases, the debt, the bailouts, the government overreaching, and job-killing policies.
 
But right now, it doesn’t appear that the Majority in Washington is listening.
 
It’s no surprise then that a Gallup survey in March showed that only 16% of Americans approve of the job Congress is doing – and 80% disapprove. 
 
The only way to restore America’s confidence in their elected officials is to prove that we are listening.
 
The folks in my home State of Missouri, like most Americans, want Congress and the President to quit treating their hard earned tax dollars like Monopoly money.
 
The folks in Missouri want me to vote no and oppose any effort to pile even more debt on our children and grandchildren.
 
I have heard, I am listening, I hope my colleagues are too.
