Mr. President, over the past several months, our Homeland has experienced direct terrorist attacks against two military bases and attempted terrorist attacks on Christmas Day and in Times Square. These attacks quickly captured the attention of the American public and stand as stark reminders of the threats our nation continues to face from terrorists across the globe.
 
After these recent attacks, I have no doubt that every American is aware of the threat from a terrorist with a bomb, which could take out a city block or bring down an airplane. But Im afraid that right now, the American public is largely unaware of a silent threat that could devastate our entire nationcyber attacks.
 
These cyber attacks happen every day, but have remained largely under the public radar. Our Government, businesses, citizens, and even social networking sites all have been hit. Cyber attacks are on the rise and unless our private sector and Congress start down a better path to protect our information networks, serious damage to our economy and our national security will follow.
 
In an ever increasing cyber age, where our financial system conducts trades via the Internet, families pay bills online, and the government uses computers to calculate benefits and implement war strategies, successful cyber attacks can be devastating. The nightmare scenarios no longer exist just in Hollywood movies. Imagine if a terrorist disrupted our air traffic control on an average day with more than 28,000 commercial aircraft in our skies; if a hacker took down Wall Street trading for just hours; or if an attack destroyed an electrical grid in a major city.
 
Scenarios like these make it even more important that we listen to the recent comments by former Director of National Intelligence Mike McConnell who testified that [i]f we were in a cyber war today, the United States would lose. That is no insignificant statement coming from a military and intelligence veteran like Mike McConnell and it should cause all of us to pause and take a look at how we should neutralize this rising threat. Our networks and way of life could be taken down by an enemy State, a terrorist group, or a single hacker. That is why Senator Hatch and I are introducing the National Cyber Infrastructure Protection Act of 2010 today.
 
Let me be blunt here: our enemies wont wait for us to do our homework, solve our turf battles, or modernize our laws before using our networks as a deadly weapon; in fact, the attacks have already started. We dont have another day to waste, and I believe our bill is the best solution to address this threat.
 
Three Principles
This Act is built on three principles: first, we must be clear about where Congress should, and, more importantly, should not legislate. Congress should set lanes in the road to protect our nations cyber security, but leave flexibility for the private sector and Government to adapt to changing threats within those lanes. We have seen within the past few years the national security problems that can arise when our laws are too rigid to keep pace with technology. We have also heard repeated concerns from industry, the private sector, and those operating critical infrastructure that over-legislating by Congress ultimately will make it harder to protect our networks as innovation and quick response get overrun by unnecessary regulatory schemes and mandates.
 
Who Is In Charge
Second, right now virtually every federal department or agency has someone who is responsible for cyber security issues. But who makes sure that all those departments and agencies work together to protect all of our government networks? Who actually has the authority to impact our cyber security strategies and activities? Unfortunately, right now, the answer is no one.
 
To solve this problem, our bill establishes a National Cyber Center and designates a single, Senate-confirmed individual, accountable to the Congress and the American people and reporting directly to the President, to serve as the Director. The Director has the statutory responsibility and authority to coordinate activities to protect Government networks and develop policies and procedures to help federal agencies do the job.
 
In order to reduce the Centers operating costs and to capitalize on the cyber expertise we all know resides in the Department of Defense, the National Cyber Center is administratively placed in DoD. But, out of deference to concerns that the military should not have too much control over Government networks, the Center is not run by the Defense Department and the Director does not report to the Secretary of Defense.
 
Because a key part of the Center is to make sure the right people are talking to each other, the Act requires those parts of DoD, the Department of Homeland Security, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation needed to carry out the Centers missions to collocate and integrate within the Center, much like the National Counterterrorism Center integrates elements of the Intelligence Community. Other federal agencies may also participate in the Center.
 
As we put this bill together, former senior Intelligence Community officials told us that providing strong budget authority was essential for the Director to have the clout needed to do the job. And so, this Act gives the Director clear input into cyber budgets across all federal agencies, much like the federal drug czar has in coordinating counterdrug budgets across different agencies. To hit this point home, the Act also creates a National Cyber Security Program, similar to the National Intelligence Program. Such influenceinfluence that the current Cyber Czar simply does not haveis essential to creating a comprehensive, cost-effective approach to securing our Government information networks.
 
Public-private Partnership
The third and final principle underlying this Act is the idea that there must be a venue for the Government and the private sector to collaborate and share information on cyber-related matters. The private sector is often on the front lines of cyber attacks, so any information it can provide to increase Government awareness of the source and nature of cyber threats will make both Government and the private sector stronger. The corollary to this is that the Government must share its own cyber threat information, including classified or declassified intelligence, with the private sector.
 
Moreover, this collaboration, in order to be effective, must be voluntary. Once the private sector stands to gain technical advice and greater access to cyber threat information, there will be a clear incentive to join with the Government in protecting our networks.
 
Our bill codifies this collaboration, creating a public-private partnership known as the Cyber Defense Alliance to facilitate the flow of information about cyber threats and the latest technologies between the private sector and the Government. The Alliance will be the clearinghouse for passing sensitive cyber threat information to the private and critical infrastructure entities on the front lines, but without compromising our intelligence sources and methods.
 
We agree with intelligence experts and private sector representatives who have told us that if the heavy hand of Government drives this collaboration, it will not be effective. Therefore, the Alliance will be managed by a Board of Directors, consisting largely of private sector representatives. And because our private partners must know their proprietary information will not be compromised if it is shared with the Government, the Act gives solid protections from FOIA and antitrust restrictions.
 
Why This Bill
Mr. President, this bill is one of many cyber bills introduced during this Congress, so some may be asking why this approach is better than all the other bills that are currently in the mix. A key aspect of this bill is that it provides a practical public-private cyber infrastructure designed to address effectively the cyber threat rather than preserve the jurisdictional turf of any one agency or congressional oversight committee. That is why it was an easy decision to set the Cyber Defense Alliance up in a national laboratory. Many of these labs already have the relationships with the private sector needed to make the Alliance a success.
In other words I dont have a dog in this fight I just want to pass the best bill to protect our networks. The cyber threat will only be eliminated when we get all of the public and private players working together in harmony under a common vision toward common mission objectives.
 
Our bill does not impose mandates on industry and the private sectormandates and regulations that form the core of other bills, raising substantial concerns among our industry and private sector partners. Our economy is in turmoil as it is and the last thing we need are mandates imposed on U.S. businesses that will put them at a serious competitive disadvantage and jeopardize their proprietary information in the global marketplace. Many industry partners have told us that if we impose new standards, rather than allowing American companies to continue to rely on existing international standards, we put these companies into the untenable position of being subjected to the regulations of other countries, including countries of known counterintelligence concern.
 
Finally, Mr. President, our bill moves away from the notion that creating a statutory Cyber Coordinator in the Executive Office of the President will solve the cyber security problem. The current Cyber Security Coordinator in the White House has neither the authority nor the staff to coordinate the Governments wide-range of cyber operations and strategies. Simply enshrining his position in statute will not overcome the claims of Executive Privilege that are bound to come when Congress asks for information and it will not guarantee the leadership necessary to address the cyber threat.
 
Also, I think many of my colleagues would agree that now is not the time to give the Department of Homeland Security more responsibility, as some of the cyber bills out there want to do. I dont think many in this Chamber would disagree that DHS is already overburdened.
 
 
Support for the Act
Mr. President, the bill we are introducing today has already earned praise from the electric power sector because of the cooperative relationship that the Cyber Defense Alliance created in this bill fosters between the Government and private sector. The entities that are part of the electric power sector recognize that this bill builds on what is already working and creates the infrastructure necessary to ensure a cooperative relationship between all of the relevant public and private cyber players to address the evolving cyber-security threat. I ask unanimous consent that this statement from the electric power sector be made a part of the record.
 
In addition, becauseas the Vice Chairman of the Intelligence CommitteeI believe no legislation in this area should impede the Intelligence Communitys ability to protect our nation from terrorist attacks and other threats, we asked the Office of the Director of National Intelligence for an informal assessment of our bill. They told us that, unlike other bills that have been introduced, this bill protects Intelligence Community equities, especially with respect to protecting classified intelligence sources and methods.
 
Conclusion
Mr. President, the National Cyber Infrastructure Protection Act of 2010 provides broad lanes in the road, without micromanaging, to give all partners in cyber security, whether Government or private, the flexibility to defend against threats from our enemies. The private sector already has a tremendous incentive to protect their own networks; all the Federal Government needs to do is support them with technology and information and get out of the way.
 
Cyber attackers have been stealing intellectual property, threatening to take down our critical infrastructure, and gaining insight into our national security networks. The longer Congress waits to act, the more our vulnerability to these attacks increases. The National Cyber Infrastructure Protection Act will put the Government, our critical infrastructure companies, and the private sector on the right path to securing our networks. I urge my colleagues to join us in supporting this important legislation.
