Mr. President, I rise in support of the Murkowski EPA disapproval resolution.
 
We must prevent the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency from imposing a backdoor energy tax on suffering families and workers.
 
This is our chance to stand WITH American families and workers, and stand AGAINST unelected bureaucrats at EPA trying to expand government’s reach.
 
Missouri families and workers do not want the higher energy costs and lost jobs that would come from allowing EPA’s big-government carbon regulations to go forward.
 
Missouri manufacturing workers, like those in states across the Midwest, are dependent on affordable energy.
 
Missouri workers would suffer terribly when EPA’s carbon regulations drive up the price of their energy and raw materials.
 
Allowing EPA’s carbon regulations to go forward would allow China to take those energy-intensive jobs away from American workers.
 
Missouri families, like those in states across the Midwest, are struggling to pay their power, heating and cooling bills.
 
Missouri families would suffer terribly when EPA carbon regulations drive up the cost of their electricity, gas and gasoline bills.
 
Allowing EPA carbon regulations to go forward would punish Missouri families with higher energy prices.
 
Like all families and workers in the Midwest, Missourians wonder why we would allow EPA to impose this punishing pain for no environmental benefits.
 
For those that want to talk about what this vote means for the science, EPA tells us that unilateral U.S. actions without China and India will have no measurable impact on world temperatures.
 
So, if you actually believe the climate science and want world temperatures to stop rising, these EPA regulations will do nothing to address your concerns.
 
You are basically telling us that you want to impose trillions of dollars in costs, hundreds of billions of dollars in new taxes, and hundreds of billions of dollars in new government spending for no environmental gain.
 
Some also try to hide behind the auto deal between EPA, the State of California and automakers.
 
We should not punish Missouri families and workers with a new energy tax in order to uphold some back-room deal between EPA and the State of California.
 
Even so, these EPA regulations are totally unnecessary for those that care about reducing carbon emissions from vehicles.
 
Congress has already authorized the Department of Transportation to impose new, stricter auto emissions standards and the Obama administration announced recently that they would do so.
 
So, again, opponents want us to punish American families and workers with job-killing, new energy taxes for no net environmental gain.
 
Some also say that this issue is linked to the Gulf oil spill and we should respond by allowing EPA’s new backdoor energy taxes.
 
I for the life of me do not see how imposing a new national energy tax is the right response to the Gulf oil spill.
 
We should be punishing British Petroleum, not the American people with new taxes.
 
But, as they say, some never want to let a crisis to go to waste. 
 
Unfortunately, many of my Democratic colleagues seek any opportunity to expand the reach of government and impose new taxes.
 
They admit it too, although they use fancy ways to say it.
 
President Obama this week repeated his call for “putting a price” on carbon.  Those are code words for imposing a carbon tax.
 
We also need to stop and think about what the Majority Leader is saying.  He and others have said that if EPA is allowed to move forward with their carbon regulations it will cut oil usage.
 
The reason is because their new energy tax will punish American consumers with so much pain at the pump that they will use less gasoline. 
 
We must stop this policy of pain.  We must stop EPA from moving forward with job-killing energy cost-raising carbon regulations. 
 
The choice is stark:  stand with EPA bureaucrats imposing a backdoor energy tax, or stand with American families and workers.
 
I urge my colleagues to stand with American families and workers and support the Murkowski resolution.
