Madame Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing today on Senate bill 3305 by Senators Menendez, Sanders and others.
 
This bill should be called the Big Oil Gulf Monopoly bill, because that is what it is.
 
The Menendez bill would make operating in the Gulf so expensive that only Big Oil could afford it, giving them a virtual monopoly in the Gulf.
 
There is unanimous agreement on this committee, and I imagine the Senate as a whole, that we need to raise the oil spill economic liability caps.  The only question is how much is best?  What does more harm than good?
 
This spill is a tragedy, and I am thankful that witnesses from Florida, Louisiana and Alaska have come here today to share their stories.
 
The public needs to know the pain of the victims of this disaster, so that we can make them whole, deter future bad behavior, and ensure future claims are paid.
 
I wonder if those victims ever thought that the reaction to their tragedy would be a proposal to reward the very Big Oil company that caused this mess.
 
The Menendez bill is a reward to Big Oil, including British Petroleum,  because it would hand Big Oil companies like BP, Exxon and others a virtual monopoly over future Gulf production.
 
The $10 billion liability cap, or unlimited liability as proposed by others, would force gulf production insurance rates to levels unaffordable to all except Big Oil companies.
 
By their very name, Big Oil companies are large enough to just write the check, pay any insurance premium, or even self-insure. 
 
The Menendez Big Oil Gulf Monopoly bill would kill all the competition that Big Oil faces.  BP and Exxon and others would be free to roam the Gulf. 
 
The Menendez Big Oil Gulf Monopoly bill would turn the Gulf of Mexico into Big Oil’s own private pond.
 
We know that the sponsors of this legislation pulled their $10 billion liability cap out of thin air.  We know that in their rush to go public with their proposal, they may not have thought out all the unintended consequences.
 
But now that we have the time to reflect, I urge this Committee to be thoughtful in reviewing what will work best to compensate victims and not give an unfair advantage to Big Oil in the future.
 
Some propose expanding the existing Oil Spill Trust Fund so that all users of oil pay more for the risk they are causing. 
 
Others propose a Price-Anderson type model that the nuclear industry uses to insure against nuclear accident.  That model would have us raise the cap for those that cause the spill, say to $1 billion, and then spread the cost of damages above that amount across the entire industry.  There may be other solutions we should consider.
 
What we do know is that America will continue to need petroleum for several more decades as we transition to cleaner, home-grown transportation fuels. 
 
So, we cannot close down the gulf.  Indeed, there are thousands of Gulf wells operating safely as we speak.  I support the Senate considering new drilling safety reforms, but we should all oppose the Menendez Big Oil Gulf Monopoly bill.
