The Senator's right, the National Association of Manufacturers says there are 22 million Americans who are hired by companies who do business not only in the United States but overseas. I would say to the Senator from New Hampshire, I think we want companies who are principally in the United States who do business overseas, because what's the alternative? The alternative is they're in Singapore or in Great Britain or other countries around the world and they're not in our country. They're not paying taxes here and they're not hiring people here.

Not just me saying it, Senator Gregg. The Lieutenant Governor of New York, Richard Ravage, wrote an article in the Wall Street Journal on June 7 where he said he greatly appreciated the stimulus money -- and this is the same problem -- but because of these requirements that prohibit governors and legislatures from making changes in the law to save money, he says -- quote -- "the net result is this, the federal stimulus” -- and this bill is the son of stimulus or daughter of stimulus – “the federal stimulus led states to increase spending in these core areas.” To increase spending. The cost of what we're doing here is causing states to increase spending, says the Governor the California, which has only raised the height of the cliff from which state spending will fall if stimulus funds evaporate.

If I may say in response to the question and comment from the Senator from Kentucky, this country was created by states, which then created a central government of limited powers. Now it is the central government that is making the states the wards of the central government. In the state of Tennessee, this year I believe for the first time the amount, the dollars in the state budget are more than half dollars that come from the federal government. And in addition to the dollars coming from here, the rules come from here. If the Senator from New Hampshire or Kentucky is trying to say Medicaid coverage is out of control. It's ruining our colleges and universities because we have no money left for them. We want to change the eligibility. That's been the case during the last ten years. We've had Medicaid spending going up in the states by 70% or 80% over a seven- or eight-year period of time. And funding at public universities is at a low level and tuitions, therefore, are going way up. The Governor is saying, let's do something about Medicaid, and then we pass a bill and we say to the governors, don't you change Medicaid. You're not allowed if you take this money to save even money in Medicaid. So spending for Medicaid goes up because we require it to go up. And that means tuitions in Kentucky, New Hampshire, Tennessee, and California, all across this country are going to be higher because of legislation like that we're considering today.
