 U.S. Senator Maria Cantwell (D-WA) released the following statement today honoring our nation’s veterans:
 
“Veterans Day is a time to commemorate the millions of Americans who have worn the uniform of our nation’s armed forces to preserve our liberty, freedom, and way of life.  From the Revolutionary War to the conflict in Afghanistan, this country has persevered and prevailed because of the selfless sacrifices of our brave men and women in uniform.
 
“America’s veterans have looked after our wellbeing; we have a solemn duty to look after theirs.  With the longest war in U.S. history ongoing in Afghanistan and the conflict in Iraq winding down, we have a new generation of veterans joining the ranks of those who defended freedom across the globe.  As a nation, we have a responsibility to ensure that our service members, veterans, and their families receive the benefits and recognition they have earned and so greatly deserve.  And we must do all we can to help veterans succeed in their transition to civilian lives.
 
 “This past year in the Senate, I have been proud to support legislation ensuring better access to job training, employment assistance, health care, housing, and education for our veterans. Legislation I supported to put veterans’ healthcare programs on a two-year budget cycle took effect last month, ensuring an uninterrupted flow of funds to Veterans Affairs medical programs regardless of any potential budget delays.  Our veterans deserve nothing less.
 
“On this Veterans Day, I think of the last combat troops just returned home from duty in Iraq, the 4th Stryker Brigade, 2nd Infantry Division, from Joint Base Lewis-McChord, and those who never made it home.  I think of the men and women who have chosen to wear our uniform at a dangerous time in our history, and of our obligation to make sure that when they complete their missions, they will receive not only our heartfelt thanks but also our enduring support.
 
“Today, I stand with Washingtonians and fellow Americans in honoring America’s veterans.  Not just today, but every day, we must show our profound gratitude for those who have made, and selflessly fought to preserve this great nation.”
