WASHINGTON – U.S. Sens. Jim Webb (D-VA) and Mark Warner (D-VA) announced today that Virginia has received nearly $3 million in grants to upgrade runways and increase airport safety at four regional airports in Virginia. The U.S. Department of Transportation grants will fund projects intended to enhance safety and bring airports up to Federal Aviation Administration standards. The projects include renovating runways, improving drainage systems, replacing escalators and conducting wildlife hazard assessments.

“Regional airports provide much-needed access to parts of the state outside of metropolitan areas,” said Senator Webb. “This funding will ensure that regional airports in Virginia can maintain proper safety standards, upgrade outdated infrastructure, and improve security controls.”

“These grants support projects that will not only create jobs in Virginia but also help invest in the longer-term safety and economic vitality of our airports,” Senator Warner said. “The projects will improve safety and working conditions for passengers and employees.”

Projects and amounts are listed below:

Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport in Newport News - $2,291,203. A $1 million grant will be used to collect geographic information systems data and identify the airport's environmental footprint in order to improve sustainability. A separate grant of $750,653 will be used to rehabilitate runway pavement. A grant of $475,000 will provide for the design to rehabilitate the existing airfield lighting fixtures and cables, associated taxiways and to construct a new electrical power vault. A grant of $65,550 will fund an assessment of potential wildlife hazards.

Lynchburg Regional/Preston Glenn Field Airport in Lynchburg - $628,506. A grant of $628,506 will provide federal funding to replace existing escalators which have reached the end of their useful life, as well as upgrade the security access control around the terminal area and replace the aging heating, ventilation and air conditioning units.

Front Royal-Warren County Airport in Front Royal - $90,000. This grant will provide federal funding for land acquisition needed for the removal of runway obstructions.

Tazewell County Airport - $42,178. This grant will provide federal funds to improve the airport drainage system to help the airport meet local drainage regulations.

Last week, Senators Webb and Warner announced $5.5 million in Department of Transportation grants to upgrade runways and purchase safety equipment at seven regional airports, including Charlottesville-Albermarle Airport, Roanoke Regional/Woodrum Field Airport, Hanover County Municipal Airport, Ingalls Field Airport, Emporia-Greensville Regional Airport, Louisa County/Freeman Field Airport and Luray Caverns Airport.
