Today, Mark Udall, a member of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, vowed to vote against adjourning for the year unless the Senate moves forward and votes on an omnibus public lands bill before the end of 2010.

"For several years, I've worked hard on the Energy and Natural Resources Committee to bridge the partisan divide and advance a host of key Colorado public lands priorities, with the intent that, as in past years, they would be passed into law as part of a larger public lands package.

"But instead of a public lands bill, the Senate is preparing to vote on an appropriations bill that is filled with earmarks and random bills that have been air-dropped in, some of which are public lands bills that have skipped the regular committee approval process. While some of these bills may have merit, this is disheartening for those of us who have worked for years, playing by the rules and shepherding bills through the legislative process to get them to the Senate floor for a vote.

"As an original author of a number of these bills that would be included in a larger public lands package, I speak for the people of Colorado when I say that we must find a way to get these much-needed bills signed into law. These bills would address critically important issues for Colorado, including mitigating the bark beetle epidemic, ensuring maintenance responsibility of the Leadville Mine Drainage Tunnel, and helping create summer jobs in ski country. These bills are not only important to Colorado and its scenic lands, but they would create jobs and help our economy in these tough times.

"Many Colorado families are working through the holidays. I promised them that I would go to Washington, D.C., to fight for them, and I am willing to work through the new year doing just that. So, until the Senate considers a public lands package on the floor, I will ask the Senate to stay in session and will oppose adjournment efforts - because Colorado can't afford more inaction on these important priorities."


Legislation that Udall has authored to be included in a larger public lands package (but is not limited to):

National Forest Insect and Disease Emergency Act:
This is a long-standing priority that Udall has worked on since he was elected to the House of Representatives. This bill will focus attention and resources to areas on our National Forests that are ravaged by insects and disease. Although this bill addresses any and all insect and disease outbreaks in our national forests, it is in direct response to an especially pronounced epidemic of bark beetles in western states, which could seriously harm our natural resources, the recreational economy of these areas, and water supplies and infrastructure.
PHOTOS - MARK UDALL DILLON BARK BEETLE TOUR
PHOTOS - MARK UDALL STEAMBOAT SPRINGS BARK BEETLE TOUR
PHOTOS - MARK UDALL ESTES PARK FIELD HEARING WITH SENATOR JOHN MCCAIN
VIDEO - MARK UDALL STEAMBOAT SPRINGS BARK BEETLE TOUR

Sugar Loaf Fire Protection District Land Exchange Act: 
This bill will improve the firefighting capacity and responsiveness in the Sugar Loaf, Colorado, community above Boulder, Colorado. It will facilitate a fair exchange of lands on the Arapahoe-Roosevelt National Forest between the Fire District and the Forest Service, enabling the Fire District to maintain and upgrade their fire stations serving the Sugar Loaf community and nearby properties at risk of wildfire. The land received in return by the federal government would become part of the Arapahoe-Roosevelt National Forest and managed accordingly by the Forest Service.

Ski Area Recreational Opportunity Enhancement Act:
This bill will boost year-round activity in ski resorts, provide more opportunities for outdoor recreation in Colorado, create jobs and aid local economies. It will revise the 1986 law governing the permitting of ski areas on National Forests, clarifying that the Forest Service is authorized to permit year-round recreational activities where appropriate.

Leadville Mine Drainage Tunnel Remediation Act:
Udall introduced a House version of this bill in 2008 and has continued to work on it when he was elected to the Senate. This bill will clarify that the Bureau of Reclamation has the authority to maintain the integrity of the tunnel and treat water that flows through this tunnel. In 2008, a blockage formed in the tunnel that backed up a large volume of water, thereby creating a potential safety hazard to the community in the event of a catastrophic failure.
PHOTOS - MARK UDALL DRAINAGE TUNNEL TOUR

San Juan Wilderness Act:
The San Juan Mountains Wilderness Act will make additions to existing wilderness area in San Juan County, Colorado, thus providing protection for these treasured lands for future generations, while respecting private property rights and allowing recreation and other uses of the land to continue. The bill is the result of extensive collaboration between residents, stakeholders and local government officials, and is written to provide protection for the land while respecting the need to access the area for water, grazing and recreation.

Camp Hale Study Act:
This legislation will direct the U.S. Secretary of the Interior to study the establishment of Camp Hale, near Leadville, Colorado, as a national historic district. Camp Hale, located in the mountains of central Colorado, was a facility that trained a number of soldiers for combat in high alpine and mountainous conditions and was principally a training venue for the Army's 10th Mountain Division and other elements of the U.S. Armed Forces.


(Legislation that Udall has Co-sponsored)

Chimney Rock National Monument Act:
The bill, introduced by Senator Michael Bennet and co-sponsored by Udall, would help protect the unique Chacoan archeological site located between Durango and Pagosa Springs. The site includes two spectacular rock spires, as well as the remains of a great house and other buildings built by the ancestors of the Pueblo Indians over a thousand years ago.


Bureau of Reclamation Fish Recovery Programs Reauthorization Act:
The bill, introduced by Senator Jeff Bingaman and co-sponsored by Udall, reauthorizes annual funding for endangered species recovery programs on the Upper Colorado and San Juan Rivers which protect four species of fish. These recovery programs are necessary to allow more than 1,800 independent water projects on these rivers to continue to operate. In addition to the funds provided by Congress, cost sharing contributions come from Colorado, Wyoming, Utah, New Mexico, the Colorado River Storage Project, power customers, and water users.
