Today, Mark Udall urged his Senate colleagues to pass his Small Business Lending Enhancement Act on a Unanimous Consent vote. But instead of joining Udall on a bipartisan bill, Republican leadership prevented passage of the bill that could have helped small business owners access credit by allowing credit unions to expand their lending. Had this bill been passed, it could have helped create hundreds of thousands of jobs across the country at a time when our national unemployment rate is close to 9.8 percent.

Before the vote, Udall spoke on the Senate floor calling on Republicans to join him in helping our country's economy by making it easier for small business owners to create jobs.

His remarks as prepared for delivery are below:

Mr. President,

I rise today to urge the Senate to pass the bipartisan bill cosponsored by thirteen of our colleagues from both sides of the aisle. The bill is the Small Business Lending Enhancement Act - Senate bill number 2919. The Senate should pass this bill today - in order to help small businesses create hundreds of thousands of jobs at no cost to taxpayers. Before I talk about this bill, I wanted to name the bipartisan cosponsors: the Majority Leader, and Senators Snowe, Collins, Schumer, Boxer, Brown, Gillibrand, Inouye, Lieberman, Nelson of Florida, Bennet of Colorado, Sanders, and Wyden.

Mr. President, this bill addresses a problem that everyone in this chamber agrees needs to be addressed: the trouble that small businesses throughout the nation continue to have accessing credit so they can grow and create jobs.

As the most recent labor statistics indicate-with the unemployment rate inching up to 9.8 percent in November-our economy continues to struggle to gain traction. We all know the ability of small businesses to expand and grow will be critical to getting our economy back on track.

How would this bill help small business? Under current law, credit unions are doing what they can to expand small business lending and meet the demands of their community's family businesses.

Yet credit unions are constrained by an arbitrary cap on the size and amount of business loans they can actually issue. In every single state, there are credit unions that want to responsibly lend money to help businesses grow and create jobs, but the federal government is standing in their way.

The bipartisan legislation that we should pass today will simply get government out of the way to allow credit unions to help jump-start the economy. Under current statute, credit unions are constrained to dedicating no more than 12.25% of their total assets to small-business lending. Many credit unions have run up against that cap.

This legislation would take the most experienced and best-run credit unions that have run up against this lending cap, and allow them to meet the rising demand for small business loans. If well-managed credit unions meet specific conditions for safety and soundness, the National Credit Union Administration-the credit unions' federal regulator-will have the authority to allow their small business lending cap to slowly increase from the current 12.25% to a maximum of 27.5% of total assets.

This proposal has the backing of the Banking Committee, the Treasury Department and the NCUA. The National Small Business Association, the National Association of Realtors, and even the conservative Americans for Tax Reform, among others, have gotten behind our efforts and they're urging us to pass this important provision.

The Credit Union National Association estimates that these sensible reforms would increase small-business lending by $10 billion within the first year of enactment, with an increase of nearly $200 million in my home state of Colorado alone, just as an example. This new access to credit is also expected to produce over 100,000 jobs nationwide. To me, it sounds like a pro-business, pro-jobs policy that we can all agree on.

In reminding my colleagues that consumer credit unions were not responsible for the financial meltdown that nearly destroyed our economy, I can assure you that they stand ready and willing to safely and soundly help rebuild our economy, if only we can get government out of their way. Let's put the needs of small businesses and Americans looking for a job ahead of typical political infighting and adopt this legislation today.
