WASHINGTON — At the urging of United States Senator Mary L. Landrieu, D-La., the continuing resolution (CR) to fund the federal government through March 4, 2011, does not include language to extended the federal review period of new offshore drilling plans to 90 from 30 days. The final vote on the CR, which Sen. Landrieu supported, passed the Senate by a vote of 79-16. It now awaits action by the House.

Sens. Landrieu and Lisa Murkowski (R-Alaska) sent a letter to Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on the Interior Chairwoman Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) and Ranking Member Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.) strongly objecting to such language in either a continuing resolution or a larger omnibus appropriations bill.

To view the letter sent by Sens. Landrieu and Murkowski, please visit http://landrieu.senate.gov/mediacenter/upload/12.21.2010LandrieumurkowskiLetter.pdf

CQ: Senate Stopgap Spending Bill Would Not Extend Review Period for Offshore Drilling
Dec. 20, 2010, By Geof Koss

The short-term spending resolution unveiled in the Senate on Dec. 19 does not include language contained in earlier versions that would have extended by 60 days the federal review period for new offshore drilling plans.

The Senate omnibus spending measure shelved last week would have extended to 90 days from 30 the review period for environmental and safety impacts from new offshore drilling. A yearlong continuing resolution the House passed earlier this month (HR 3082) also contained the extension.

Critics, including Mary L. Landrieu, D-La., and Lisa Murkowski, R-Alaska, called the extension unnecessary and said it would further delay oil and gas development already stalled since the BP oil spill, which began in April in the Gulf of Mexico. Despite the opposition, Senate appropriators included the language in a proposed omnibus spending bill that would have run through the end of fiscal 2011.

But the omnibus was scuttled over Republican objections. A pared-down continuing resolution unveiled over the weekend would run until March. That measure did not include the drilling review language.

A Senate GOP aide said the provision was dropped in an effort to make the latest funding resolution as "clean" as possible.

The omission makes it much less likely that the change will make its way into law, given that Republicans, who harshly criticized the Obama administration's response to the oil spill, will control the House when the next funding measure is written.

Investigations into the Interior Department's performance leading up to the BP spill found that regulators were rubber-stamping exploration plans, in part because they said they could not meet the 30-day deadline for reviewing the proposals.

The Senate spending legislation would provide an additional $23 million to the Interior Department's Bureau of Ocean Energy Management for oil rig inspections in the gulf.
