
WASHINGTON — United States Senator Mary L. Landrieu, D-La., issued the following statement today after her vote to invoke cloture on the DREAM Act.  The cloture motion was defeated by a vote of 55-41.

Sen. Landrieu said:

"America is a land of enormous opportunity that is strengthened, not weakened, by the immeasurable contributions of people from different backgrounds.  There are 2.1 million young people in this country who were brought to America by their parents as children.  They are undocumented, yet they know no other home than the United States of America.  I believe these young adults deserve a chance to earn their citizenship.         

"The DREAM Act will provide a path to citizenship that will acknowledge their hard work, academic achievement, and military service.  This narrowly tailored bill would allow these individuals to apply for citizenship if they have no criminal history and graduate from high school, attend college or serve with honor in the military. They must pay all back taxes and demonstrate the ability to read, write and speak English.

"Defense Secretary Gates, former Secretary of State Colin Powell, and many other prominent military and civic leaders favor this change in the law.  They believe this bill will bolster our national security, while strengthening the principles of democracy that our soldiers, sailors, airmen and Marines defend around the world each day.  I agree with them.

"Contrary to the rhetoric of its vocal opponents, the DREAM Act, because of its limited scope, will not open the door for future abuses of the system.  This bill does not address all of the challenges that we face due to illegal immigration, but it is an important and fair step in the reform process.  We have more to do to make our country safe, and I will continue to work with colleagues on both sides of the aisle to strengthen security along our borders.

"America's greatness is sustained generation after generation by the skills, talents and drive of our individual citizens.  I believe the 2.1 million individuals affected by the DREAM Act can and will add to that talent pool if given a chance to earn the designation of citizen, and our country will be stronger, not weaker, with their full participation."
