WASHINGTON — WASHINGTON – United States Senator Mary L. Landrieu, D-La., today served her Senate colleagues Gulf Coast seafood gumbo for lunch in participation with Dine America/Dine Louisiana 2010.
Today, 290 chefs and restaurateurs nationwide will participate in Dine America/Dine Louisiana 2010 as a statement of support for Gulf Coast seafood. As a result of the BP oil spill, demand for Gulf Coast seafood has fallen at a time when the industry needed it the most. Today’s event is designed to show the public that culinary professionals enjoy and recommend Gulf Coast seafood. 
“Our fishermen, chefs, and cuisine are such an indelible part of Louisiana’s culture and heritage,” Sen. Landrieu said.  “People know that when you visit New Orleans or other parts of Louisiana that you are getting the best food America can offer. I have grown up eating Gulf Coast seafood and to this day it is still my favorite thing to order when my family and I dine out. That is why I am so proud to be a part of this celebration of Gulf Coast seafood. Together, with hundreds of restaurants across the nation, we are helping to celebrate Louisiana seafood as the finest in the world. In honor of that, I served my Senate colleagues Gulf Coast seafood gumbo for lunch. It is a small but important way to recognize Louisiana’s long history of putting seafood on restaurant tables across the United States.”

Additionally, the White House Executive Chef, U.S. Senate dining and the House of Representatives dining today served Gulf Coast seafood gumbo in support of Dine America/Dine Louisiana 2010.
Photographs are available for publication:

    Sen. Mary Landrieu serves Gulf gumbo to her Senate colleagues at lunch today as part of the Dine American/Dine Louisiana 2010 event to promote Gulf seafood.  Sen. Landrieu serves Sen. Mark Pryor (Ark.), right, gumbo during lunch today:
http://landrieu.senate.gov/mediacenter/upload/12012010gumbo2.jpg

    Sen. Mary Landrieu serves Gulf gumbo to her Senate colleagues at lunch today as part of the Dine American/Dine Louisiana 2010 event to promote Gulf seafood.  Sen. Landrieu serves Sen. Al Franken (Minn.), right, gumbo during lunch today: http://landrieu.senate.gov/mediacenter/upload/12012010gumbo3.jpg

    Sen. Mary Landrieu serves Gulf gumbo to her Senate colleagues at lunch today as part of the Dine American/Dine Louisiana 2010 event to promote Gulf seafood.  Sen. Landrieu serves Sen. Carl Levin (Mich.), right, gumbo during lunch today: http://landrieu.senate.gov/mediacenter/upload/12012010gumbo4.jpg
