WASHINGTON — United States Senator Mary L. Landrieu, D-La., today voted to extend the 2001 and 2003 income tax cuts to 98% of Louisiana families.  The Senate voted this morning to end debate on two separate tax cut bills.  The bill introduced by Sen. Max Baucus (D-Mont.), which extended the tax cuts to individuals making less than $200,000 a year and families making less than $250,000 a year, failed by a vote of 53-36.  The bill introduced by Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.), which would extend the tax cuts to taxpayers making less than $1 million a year, failed by a vote of 53-37.  Senate rules require 60 votes to limit debate and move the bill forward.
 
"For the Republicans to push for the permanent extension of tax cuts for the wealthy and reject the extension of unemployment benefits for millions of Americans and the more than 30,000 Louisianians out of work right now is the height of arrogance and irresponsibility, and downright mean-spirited as we approach the Christmas season," Sen. Landrieu said.  "When most Republicans' stated goal is to defeat this president, how can these negotiations they claim to be having with Congressional Democrats and the White House be in good faith?  I am going to stand up to Mitch McConnell and the Republicans, and I hope President Obama does not end up going along with their wishes.  The election is over and it is time to put partisan politics aside and do what we were sent here to do, which is to get our economy moving again and put Americans back to work." 
 
The Baucus and Schumer bills also extended Unemployment Insurance (UI) benefits for one year and continued the Emergency Unemployment Compensation (EUC) benefits for one year.  According to the Louisiana Workforce Commission, there are more than 30,000 Louisianians currently receiving regular unemployment insurance benefits who will not be eligible for extended benefits without passing an extension of the EUC program. 
 
Congressional leaders and the White House plan to continue negotiations over the next two weeks to extend tax cuts and Unemployment Insurance before Congress leaves town for the year.
 
The bills voted on today also included extensions of several Gulf Opportunity (GO) Zone tax credits that Sen. Landrieu has been working to pass.
 
These provisions include:

Extension of the GO Zone Low Income Housing Tax Credit placed-in-service date from January 1, 2011 to January 1, 2013. Without this extension, almost 6,200 Gulf Coast units are unlikely to be completed and an estimated 13,000 construction-related jobs are in jeopardy.
One-year extension of the Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC) through Aug. 28, 2010, for certain employers hiring in the Hurricane Katrina core disaster area.    At least 1,000 companies have participated in the program to hire approximately 150,000 employees since the credit became available in 2005.
One-year extension of the GO Zone Historic Tax Credit through 2010 for qualified expenditures in the GO Zone. The provision increases the existing rehabilitation credit from 10 percent to 13 percent of qualified expenditures for any qualified rehabilitated building.  For any certified historic structure, the credit is increased from 20 percent to 26 percent.  The Louisiana State Historic Preservation Department estimates that 93 projects, with an estimated total project value of more than $348 million, are at risk in Louisiana if the credit is not extended.

"Any compromise reached must have the important Go Zone tax credit extensions that are needed so desperately in Louisiana," said Sen. Landrieu.  "If they are not included, construction that is under way will be shut down, costing 13,000 hard-working Louisianians to lose their jobs and destroying the opportunity for thousands of families to get affordable, quality housing."
