Michael Bennet, U.S. Senator for Colorado, took part in a ceremony to honor America's veterans at Fort Logan National Cemetery.

In his remarks, Bennet highlighted the need for America to reaffirm its commitment to our military veterans, and renewed the call for the creation of a national cemetery to serve veterans in Southern Colorado.

The full text of Bennet's remarks, as prepared for delivery, are included below:

Thank you for the opportunity to be here today and for the chance to take part in this wonderful ceremony.

But most of all, thank you to those among us today, and across this country, who have proudly worn the uniform of the United States of America. This event, this Day is for you -- to honor your service, your sacrifice, and everything you have done on behalf of this Nation.

We stand here -- in this National Veterans Cemetery -- surrounded by the gravestones of America's fallen soldiers -- some of whom gave their lives in battle, and many, many more of who returned home to continue serving our Nation in every way imaginable.

And as we stand here today to give thanks to our veterans, we would also be well served to reflect on the memory of those who lost their lives this past week at Fort Hood. Though no words can ever alleviate the pain caused by this senseless tragedy, we must take the time today, and every day, to give thanks for their service, their sacrifice, and do everything within our power to prevent events like this from every happening again.

Being here today, among all of you, I am reminded of a simple but powerful truth: That the strength of America's military lies in the spirit and commitment of the men and women who have proudly worn the uniform.

You have fought bravely overseas so we might know freedom here at home; you have sacrificed yourselves so we might give the precious gift of opportunity to others; and you have given your lives so that we, and generations after us, may live our lives to the fullest.

So today is a day for us to give thanks for your service. It's also a time for America to renew its commitment to you, America's veterans: To ensure that a grateful nation keeps its promise from the day you enlist to the day you are laid to rest.

And as we must keep our promise to you, we must do the same for all future veterans serving America in Iraq, Afghanistan and across the globe. It is their service to this country that binds soldiers past and present together. And it is our solemn obligation to honor that service that binds us to all of you.

That obligation means, first and foremost, ensuring the men and women who serve in America's military are sent into battle only when absolutely necessary. And when our troops are deployed, we must ensure they have the tools and weapons they need to succeed.

We must be committed to providing the best time, talent, and resources necessary for our military to perform at their best, in the safest manner possible. And when they return home, we must make sure the wounds of battle are tended to with the best care and benefits we, as a Nation, can provide. And our commitment to veterans health care cannot wane, even years after a vet ends his active military service.

This Nation's lifelong commitment must remain exactly that. Lifelong.

We must also recognize our troops' service need not end the moment they take off the uniform; we can enlist their skills and experience to impart the virtues of service to the next generation and instill the value of learning and self-sacrifice as a means to self-improvement.

And when our veterans have fulfilled their duties and lived out their lives, we must ensure they are afforded a final resting place that is worthy of their sacrifice. It is for this reason, we must work to expand our existing capacity and build a national veterans cemetery in southern Colorado.

In sum, we, as a Nation, must work to match their actions and recognize their service with a deep and abiding commitment to meet their needs.

President John F. Kennedy once said: "A Nation reveals itself not only by the men [and women] it produces, but also by the men [and women] it honors, the men [and women] it remembers."

So let us not forget these men and women who served and died, and indeed those who served and live among us today. As we continue to add to the esteemed roll call of veterans, let us as a Nation not forget or renege on promises made to some of the best among us.

We promised to take care of them and their surviving loved ones in exchange for the sacrifices made and the risks taken.

And that is exactly what we must do.

Thank you.
