WASHINGTON - Sen. Mike Johanns (R-Neb.) has nominated 51 individuals to the military service academies.

“These outstanding students have expressed a desire to serve their country and I am pleased to support their efforts to attend our nation’s military academies,” Johanns said. “Each of these students has demonstrated strong leadership, academic excellence and will be outstanding representatives of our state.”

 Alexander Asche of Omaha has received a letter of recommendation to attend the U.S. Coast Guard Academy. Asche attends Elkhorn High School.

 Alexandra Lehmann Bilunas of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy. Bilunas attends Duchesne Academy of the Sacred Heart.

 Brianna Lehmann Bilunas of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy. Bilunas attends Duchesne Academy of the Sacred Heart.

 Thomas Blanton of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln has been nominated to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Blanton attends UNL and is a graduate of Alliance High School.

 Owen Otis Bond of Avoca has been nominated to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and U.S. Air Force Academy. Bond attends Syracuse-Dunbar-Avoca High School.

 Alex James Culp of Bellevue has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy. Culp attends Daniel J. Gross Catholic High School.

 Thomas Wayne Cravey of Grand Island, now enlisted in the U.S. Army, has been nominated to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Cravey attended Grand Island Senior High School.

 John Michael Dodson from Beaver City has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy. Dodson attends Southern Valley High School.

 Sarah Mae Duke of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy. Duke attends the University of Nebraska at Omaha. She is a graduate of Duchesne Academy of the Sacred Heart High School.

 Tyrus Edward Ernest of Papillion has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy. Ernest attends Papillion LaVista High School.

 Brett Jay Fabian of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy and the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Fabian attends Omaha North High Magnet School.

 Drew Michael Fairchild-Flynn from Dawson has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy. Fairchild-Flynn attends Humboldt Table Rock Steinhauer High School.

 Aaron Frey of Lincoln has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy and U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Frey attends Lincoln Pius X High School.

 Ethan Lyle Fritz of Verdon has been nominated to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Fritz attends Falls City High School.

 Aleck Gao of Lincoln has been nominated to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and U.S. Naval Academy. Gao attends Lincoln Southwest High School.

 Jordan Lee Haeffner of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy. Haeffner attends Creighton Preparatory High School.

 Matthew James Hansen of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy. Hansen attends Creighton Preparatory High School.

 Stephen Paul Hansen of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy. Hansen attends Creighton Preparatory High School.

 Austin Lee Heckman from Milford has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy. Heckman attends Milford Senior High School.

 James Leuther Heitmann of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy and U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Heitmann attends Millard High School.

 Lindsey L. Hoffman of Trumbull has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy. Hoffman attends Doniphan-Trumbull High School.

 Paul Steven Huss of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy. Huss attends Mount Michael Benedictine High School.

 Britt Jensen of Fremont has been nominated to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Jensen attends Fremont Senior City High School.

 Schyler Kerns of Lincoln has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy. Schuman attends Lincoln Southwest High School.

 John Douglas Kolbo of Papillion has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy. Kolbo attends Gross Catholic High School.

 Kyle Joseph Krager of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy. Krager attends Millard West High School.

 Kirsten Larson of Holdrege has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy. Larson attends Holdrege High School.

 Linnea Larson of Holdrege has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy. Larson attends Holdrege High School.

 Jacob Kelly Lee of Papillion has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy. Lee attends Papillion-LaVista High School.

 Onanong Lemkoontod from Kearney has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy and the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. He attended Kearney High School.

 Grant Paker Lubeck of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy. Lubeck attends Creighton Prep South High School.

 Taylor William Lueck of Boys Town has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy. Lueck attends Boys Town High School.

 Robert Paul Mancuso of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy and U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Mancuso attends Omaha Central High School.

 Tyler Andrew McKeone from Lexington has been nominated to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. McKeone attends Lexington High School.

 Ryan Bruce McVay of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy. McVay attends Westside High School.

 Gregory William Nordhues from Kearney has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy. He attended Kearney High School.

 Trenton Alec Pache of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy. Pache attends Westside High School.

 Jade Perry of Lincoln has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy. Perry attends Lincoln Northeast High School.

 Ryan Gable Randall of Blair has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy. Randall attends Blair High School.

 Connor Rise of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Rise attends Brownell Talbot High School.

 Tommy Lee Sellers, III of Bellevue has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy and the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Sellers, a graduate of Bellevue East High School, attends the Marion Military Institute.

 Jonathon Michael Siefkes of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy. Siefkes attends Millard West High School.

 Trevor Smith of Lincoln has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy. Smith attends Lincoln Southeast High School.

 Christian Michael Spaccarotella of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Spacccarotella attends Millard South High School.

 Zach Toelle of Waterloo has been nominated to the U.S. Naval Academy and U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Toelle attends Waterloo High School.

 Erin Cecelia Walker from Wahoo has been nominated to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and U.S. Naval Academy. Walker attends Wahoo High School.

 Emma Lauren Webster of Nebraska City has been nominated to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Webster attends Nebraska City High School.

 Spencer Louis Welton of Omaha has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy and the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Welton attends Omaha Central High School.

 John Philip Westerfield of Papillion has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy and the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Westerfield attends Papillion-LaVista High School.

 James Joseph White of Ralston has received a letter of recommendation to attend the U.S. Coast Guard Academy. White attends Ralston High School.

 Dylan Woldt of Lincoln has been nominated to the U.S. Air Force Academy. Woldt attends Minnesota State University and graduated from Lincoln East High School.
