WASHINGTON
Sen. Mike Johanns (R-Neb.) today commented on President Obama's suggestion that repealing the 1099 tax provision in the health care law represents an opportunity to work with Republican Members of Congress.

"I am confident that small businesses and job creators across the country share my appreciation in hearing the President suggest repealing the 1099 provision of the health care law because it is 'counterproductive' and 'too burdensome for small businesses,' said Johanns. "I have worked diligently to repeal this nonsensical mandate and my legislation to repeal it is ready for another vote the moment the Senate comes back into session later this month. I hope my colleagues take to heart both the President's words and the concern of job creators across the country and join me in repealing this job stifling provision."

An excerpt of President Obama's comments from today's White House press conference:

"Now, if the Republicans have idea ideas for how to improve our health care system, if they want to suggest modifications that would deliver faster and more effective reform to a health care system that, you know, has been wildly expensive for too many families, businesses, certainly for our federal government, I'm happy to consider some of those ideas. For example, I know one of the things that's come up is that the 1099 provision in the health care bill seems to be burdensome for small businesses. It requires too much paperwork, too much filing. It's probably counterproductive. It was designed to make sure that revenue was raised to help pay for some of the other provisions. But if it ends up just being so much trouble that small businesses find it difficult to manage, that's something that we should take a look at."

Background:

 Section 9006 of the health care law mandates that every business, charity, and local and state government entity submit 1099 forms for business transactions totaling $600 or more in a given year.  This mandate adds routine business expenses like phone bills, office products, shipping costs; and would increase businesses’ reporting requirement by as much as 2,000 percent.

 Johanns introduced legislation on July 14, 2010 and proposed an amendment to the Small Business Jobs Act on September 15, 2010 that would have fully repealed the requirement.

 Johanns' leadership on 1099 repeal:

 Johanns Leads Push To Repeal Health Care Law's Paperwork Mandate; 7/14/10

 1099 Amendment Gaining Bipartisan Support; 8/5/10

 Johanns: 1099 Alternative Punishes Job Creators, Hitting Thousands Of Small Businesses; 8/6/10

 Johanns: Small Business Bill Misses Critical Opportunity, Includes Additional 1099 Mandates; 9/16/10

 Editorials:

 Pass Johanns Legislation; Omaha World-Herald; 8/18/10

 Let’s fix Obamacare’s tax paperwork problem for small business; Washington Examiner; 8/20/10

 Mike Johanns: Fix in small-business bill would end onerous costs; Omaha World-Herald, 9/13/10

 Johanns' proposal would relieve paperwork burden from small business; Grand Island Independent; 9/13/10

 Ease the burden of Obamacare's paperwork; Washington Examiner; 9/21/10
