Many Idaho students seek internships in the Washington, D.C., and Idaho offices of the Idaho Congressional Delegation each year. To assist in that process, representatives from Idaho Senator Mike Crapo’s office will visit Idaho university campuses next week to meet with Idaho students to discuss the internship program. Crapo’s internship coordinator and staff assistant Kathryn Hitch, as well as other staffers, will meet with students next week on the campuses of Boise State University, Idaho State University and the University of Idaho.

Interns generally work with staff members on legislative issues, communicate with Idaho constituents and assist with hearings on Capitol Hill. Internship applicants must supply an application form, written essay, letters of recommendation and transcript information. 

“The ultimate civics lesson is to spend time observing the operations of our federal government from an internship in Washington, D.C. or in Idaho,” said Crapo. “I encourage Idaho students who are interested to learn more about the Senate’s internship opportunities during our Idaho campus visits.”

Tuesday, November 9:
Boise State University 9:00 a.m. – 4:00 p.m. Student Union Ballroom & Classroom meetings

Wednesday, November 10:
Idaho State University 10:00 a.m.– Noon; 1:00 p.m.– 3:00 p.m. Rendezvous Building, Conference Room

Thursday, November 11:
University of Idaho 2:00 p.m. Career Center

Friday, November 12:
University of Idaho 9:00 a.m.- 2:00 p.m. Student Commons 

To learn more about the internships offered through Crapo’s office, please visit the Crapo Campus Student section of the Senator’s website at http://crapo.senate.gov. Information and application materials on internships as well as deadlines for the materials may be found at http://crapo.senate.gov/resources/interns.cfm. Due to unanticipated delays in mail delivery on Capitol Hill, students who are applying for internships are encouraged to fax, not mail, their materials; the fax number is (202) 228-1375.
