Washington, D.C. – U.S. Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell delivered the following remarks on the Senate floor Saturday regarding the need to have the American people’s concerns addressed through debates and amendments before votes on controversial legislation:

Mr. President, we will soon be voting on two consequential and contentious matters: the DREAM Act and the repeal of the legislation concerning the Defense Department’s ‘Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell’ policy.

As our Ranking Member on one of the two committees of jurisdiction has just made clear, the Democratic Majority in the Senate is again depriving the American people of their right to have their concerns addressed through debate on amendments by depriving the Minority of its right to offer amendments. 

When Democrats were in the minority, my friend the Majority Leader said this ‘is a ‘very bad practice,’ and it ‘runs against the basic nature of the Senate.’  In fact, he suggested we should not shut off debate ‘before any amendments have been offered.’

With back-to-back blockage of amendments on both the DREAM Act and legislation repealing the ‘Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell’ policy, the current Majority has set a dubious record by denying the minority its right to amendment a total of 43 times. 

To put that in perspective, in his four years as Majority Leader, Senator Frist did this fifteen times.  The current Senate Majority, in the same amount of time, has done it three times as often. 

In fact, the current Majority has blocked the minority from  offering amendments more often than the last six majority leaders combined. 

The danger of following this practice is underscored by the flawed process used on the very measures before us.

The DREAM Act the Senate will vote on today has never had a Senate hearing.  In fact, it has not had any Senate committee action in seven years. 

But, of course, this is a House bill.  And the legislative record there is more sparse still.  The House, like the Senate, has never had a legislative hearing on the DREAM Act.  And it has never had a markup there either.  And now the Senate Majority is preventing their colleagues from addressing the concerns of the American people by shutting off the ability to offer any floor amendments.

So in sum, there has never been an amendment offered to the DREAM Act at either the committee or floor stage, in either House of Congress, since President’s Bush’s first term. 

I guess our Democratic colleagues believe that this bill is so perfect it doesn’t need any amendments whatsoever—just a few last minute rewrites during a lame duck session.  I don’t think that’s what the American people believe. 

In regard to the ill-considered effort to repeal the military policy on  ‘Don’t ask, Don’t tell’, the Majority Leader has insisted on pressing forward with this effort despite the fact that the ranking member of the Armed Services Committee has established the need for additional hearings.

The all volunteer force has had many successes, but has this body become so alienated from the enlisted men and women in uniform that liberal interest groups have more influence over military personnel policy than the senior enlisted leaders of the Army and Marine Corps, who were denied the opportunity to testify.

This repeal will be rushed through despite the fact that it is concerning to those in Army combat arms units, and 58% of those in Marine Corps combat arms units believe that repeal will be harmful to unit readiness.  Should we ignore the volunteers charged with the most difficult missions in our military: combat with the enemy?

Democrats will deny the opportunity to amend the bill to require the service chiefs to certify that this repeal will not harm combat readiness, although they are responsible for training the force.  Why would anyone oppose this change, or even the opportunity to vote on this change?

This is harmful during a time of war and an irresponsible manner in which to change policies that the Commandant of the Marine Corps has stated could risk lives.

I am going to recommend that my colleagues heed the advice of my friend from Nevada, which he gave a few years ago, and not vote to shut down the debate and amendment process for these bills at least until the Minority is allowed to offer, debate and vote on a limited number of amendments, and the Senate is allowed to be the Senate again.

I yield the floor.
