Washington, D.C. – U.S. Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell delivered the following remarks on the Senate floor Thursday introducing his one-page, clean CR funding the government through February 18:

“I want the American people to see something. I want them to see the piece of legislation Democrats dropped on us three days before Congress was expected to wrap up and go home for Christmas break.

“I want the American people to cast their minds back to last year, when Democrats did the same thing.

“They dropped the 2,700-page health care bill on us because they didn’t want us to see what was in it.

“Only afterward did we find out about the Cornhusker Kickback, the Louisiana Purchase, and all the rest.

“Well here we go again.

“All of this is eerily familiar to anyone who remembers the health care debate.

“We’ve even got snow in the forecast — just like last year, when we voted on the health care bill in a blizzard.

“This bill is so enormous it took the Government Printing Office two days to print it.

“It spends more than half a billion dollars a page.

“It runs just under 2,000 pages.

“And it’s got more than a billion dollars in it for the Democrat health care bill that an ever-growing number of Americans want to repeal, not fund.

“This is exactly the kind of thing the American people voted against in November.

“It’s unbelievable, really.

“Just a few weeks after the voters told us they don’t want us rushing major pieces of complicated, costly, far-reaching legislation through Congress, we get this.

“They want us to ram this gigantic, trillion dollar bill through Congress — and they’re using the Christmas break as a inducement to get us to vote for it.

“This is no way to legislate.

“Americans expect more from Congress — and they demanded more on Election Day.

“And that’s why today I’m introducing this: a clean, one-page continuing resolution that keeps government funded through February 18th at current spending levels.

“Once the new Congress is sworn in, we’ll have a chance to pass a less expensive bill free of wasteful spending.

“Until then, we should take a step back and respect the clear will of the voters.

“Americans don’t want massive, trillion dollar bills rushed through Congress on our way out the door — they want us to be careful and responsible with their money.

“So I urge my colleagues to join me in support of this one-page CR.

“I don’t think there’s any question it’s the right thing to do.”
