 U.S. Senator Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) appeared on MSNBC’s the Daily Run Down this morning discussing issues like the START Treaty, the government bailout of General Motors, and stopping the looming tax hikes. Below are portions of the interview: 

ON STOPPING THE TAX HIKES… 
Literally, there are a lot of people on all sides of this particular issue. And probably the best thing and the smartest thing to do would be to kick this over and don't play around with tax relief for anybody at this point, for at least two years, until after the next election, so it will be less political and it will be handled maybe in a better way. But it's not just that. We've got to solve this AMT problem, the alternative minimum tax problem. It just keeps going out of control. We've got to get the research and development tax credit through. We've got to deal with the death tax. My gosh, if that goes back up to 55%, that's really unfair to small businesses, farmers, and others who die and their family's left trying to pay the bill. 

ON GOVERNMENT BAILOUT OF GENERAL MOTORS 
Well, I think the government shouldn't be picking and choosing. That's the problem. If the government prefers one company over another, you know, in the future, that's not the way to go. And secondly, once you get the government into it, there's always going to be cross ties that really will hamstring the industry and that particular company. So I'm not a real fan of government saving large corporations like that. 

ON START TREATY CONSIDERATION DURING LAME DUCK SESSION OF CONGRESS… 
It's going to take more time than just a couple of days or even a week to examine the START Treaty. Let's face it, treaties usually take a little bit of time, because they're very serious things. And this one, we do not have a verification process with regard to the ballistic missile manufacturing facilities. There are telemetry problems with this treaty; there are other problems with this treaty that are significant problems. And to bring it up in a lame-duck session where you now have new people elected, it just seems to me that -- who won't be sitting here in the lame-duck session -- seems to me that's the wrong thing to do. 

ON WHETHER HE’LL SUPPORT THE START TREATY… 
I haven't made up my mind on it. I believe we should have a START Treaty. The question is, is this going to put the United States at a disadvantage? And there are some indications that it may very well do just that.
