In a discussion on the Senate floor today with Senator Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa), Senator Orrin Hatch (R-Utah), the incoming Ranking Republican on the Senate Finance Committee, laid out the grave costs and consequences to families, job creators and investors all across America and in his home state of Utah if action is not taken to stop the massive tax hikes that will hit on January 1st. The Finance Committee has jurisdiction over tax policy in the Senate. 

“If we allow this critical tax relief to expire on January 1, my home state of Utah would not be spared,” said Hatch. “The Beehive State would lose an average of 6,200 jobs each year and household disposable income would drop by $2,200.” 

Hatch explained that the President and the Democrats in Congress have had years to stop the tax hikes, but have refused to act: “The President and most of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have decided that the answer to the question of fully extending the tax relief that is set to expire in just about 44 days is no. However, the right answer for our country’s future is that it should all be extended. The plain truth is that those most affected by allowing this tax relief to expire are not the wealthy, but those Americans who depend on a strong and growing economy for their livelihoods.” 

Hatch highlighted a study by the Heritage Center for Data Analysis that concludes that the President’s tax plan to allow the tax relief provisions to expire for the top two income brackets would have very serious consequences for millions earning far less than those targeted. The report found that the President’s plan would: 

	Reduce economic growth for at least the next ten years; 
	Reduce our gross domestic product by $1.1 trillion over a ten-year period; and 
	Reduce jobs by 238,000 next year, 876,000 lost in 2016, and an average of 693,000 jobs each year over a ten-year period. 

“Business investment, personal savings, disposable income, and consumer spending would all be lower if these taxes go up. This is exactly the wrong direction we need as the U.S. struggles to recover from this nasty recession,” concluded Hatch. “Tragically, and especially in this time of economic stress and high unemployment, the real cost of taxation is paid by a group of unintended victims. These are the men and women, and their families, who do not get the chance to have a job or a higher paying job because the tax destroys the economic growth that might have provided such an opportunity.”
