U.S. Senator Orrin Hatch (R-Utah), the incoming Ranking Member of the Senate Finance Committee, appeared on Fox News this morning discussing issues like stopping the looming tax hikes and the letter from all 42 Senate Republicans to Majority Leader Reid announcing their opposition to consideration of any legislation during the lame duck session of Congress that doesn’t stop tax hikes or fund the government. 

Below are key excerpts of the interview: 

On Senate Republican Letter to Majority Leader Reid Announcing Opposition to Considering Legislation that Doesn’t Stop Tax Hikes, Fund Government… 
We made it very clear that we are not going to give cloture on anything until we solve this tax relief problem. Frankly there is no reason not to. If we don't solve the tax problem, our GDP will take almost a 2% hit, which will be catastrophic to jobs, to our economy, to our competition in the world and so forth. We have to quit the blame games and quit playing all these games around here and get the job done that should be done. 

On Democrats’ Latest Small Business Tax Hike Proposal… 
The Democrats would like to raise the threshold to $500,000 to $1 million. That still hurts a lot of small business people who put the money back into their businesses and create 70% of the jobs. We believe you've got to extend that tax relief for everybody, and my suggestion is that they kick it over until after the next presidential election, then we can really think about it, and make the right decisions instead of doing some slap-dash thing right here at the last second in this particular congress. 

On a Two or Three-Year Extension of the Tax Relief… 
Well I would like that tax relief to be permanent. I think they are going to have to kick it over. We are just not going to let the small business community get hit. That is where the hope for 70% of new jobs will be created and that's always been the case in the past. Why play around with that and why play around the way they are doing in this lame-duck session with all kinds of frivolous things or things that don't amount to a hill of beans compared to solving this tax relief problem. 

On Democrats Pushing Other Issues That Won’t Help the Economy… 
In the Senate, we are not doing anything the last part of this week, which we could be right on this bill, solve the tax problem. We ought to solve these things first.
