U.S. Senator Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) announced today that he is signing onto a friend-of-the-court brief supporting Utah’s side of a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the new federal health insurance law. The brief is being led by Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Kentucky). 

“The $2.6 trillion health law is an astonishing expansion of federal power and busts the limits that the Constitution imposes on the federal government,” said Hatch. “I believe the courts will respond favorably to the kind of sound constitutional arguments presented by Utah as a party to this lawsuit and in our friend of the court brief. If the federal government can tell Americans what goods or services they must buy with their own money, the federal government has no limits anymore and our liberty is in jeopardy.” 

The brief argues that forcing Americans to purchase a government-approved level of health of health insurance “dramatically oversteps the bounds of the Commerce Clause which has always been understood as a power to regulate, and not to compel, economic activity.” 

“Congress must obey the Constitution rather than make it up as we go along,” said Hatch. “Liberty requires limits on government, and those limits do not allow Congress to dictate economic decisions rather than regulate economic activities.” 

Utah is one of the original plaintiffs in this lawsuit, now brought by a total of 20 states, the National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB), and individual citizens. U.S. District Judge Roger Vinson in October rejected the Obama administration’s motion to dismiss the entire lawsuit and will hold a hearing on the merits of several of its counts in December. 

Hatch was the first member of Congress publicly to argue that the Constitution does not authorize Congress to require that individuals purchase health insurance or face a financial penalty. In December 2009, he voted for two points of order that the new law is unconstitutional. In June 2010, Hatch introduced the American Liberty Restoration Act (S.3502) which would repeal the unconstitutional individual insurance mandate being challenged in this lawsuit. Fifteen Senators have so far co-sponsored the bill, which is endorsed by groups such as NFIB and the National Retail Federation.
