WASHINGTON, DC — U.S. Senator Pat Roberts today released the names of the young Kansans who will receive his nomination for appointments to U.S. Service Academies.

 “I am very pleased to announce this year’s nominees,” Senator Roberts said. “These men and women are outstanding representatives of Kansas in every way, and I wish them the best of luck.” 

 In making the nominations, Senator Roberts followed the recommendations of his Academy Screening Board. The nonpartisan Board is comprised of seven volunteers from across Kansas and is overseen by Karin Wisdom, Senator Roberts’ District Director in Wichita. As part of the decision-making process, board members conduct personal interviews with the applicants, as well as review their written applications, G.P.A, and standardized test scores.

 Once nominated by Senator Roberts, the applicants then must meet the individual admission requirements of each academy. The academies will make the final decision on who will receive an appointment of admission. Due to the limited number of openings at each academy, not every nominee will receive an appointment. The academies this spring will announce appointments for the class entering in July 2011. Senator Roberts’ nominees are as follows:

U.S. Air Force Academy - (Colorado Springs, Co)
Shelby Bottoms, Overland Park
Aubry Eaton, Leawood
Jacob Helm, Norcatur
Stephen Houston, Tribune
Hunter Jewett, Olathe
Courtney Keplinger, Leawood
Carl Minnix, Scott City
Nathan Petrie, Berryton
Grant Simmons, Olathe
Emily Wilson, Overland Park

 

U.S. Naval Academy - (Annapolis, MD)
Lauren Brodie, Paola
Douglas Brown, Overland Park
Adam Chinery, Stilwell
Brandon Douglas, Overland Park
Jackson Dwyer, Olathe
Devin Gagnebin, Hutchinson
Connor Huggett, Overland Park
Samuel Kendrick, Colby
Grant LeTerza, Leawood
Joshua Llewellyn, Oakley
Jason McGinty, Topeka
Spencer Michelson, Overland Park
Kevin Palmer, Kansas City
Adrian Strecker, Wichita
Joshua Thornton, Erie
Colleen Turner, Leon
Frederick Wood, Lake Quivira

U.S. Military Academy (West Point, NY)
Charles Apt IV, Iola
Seamus Bann, Wichita
Hervey Carraway, Wichita
Mackenzie Hartwell, Eudora
Devin Magee, Overland Park
Silas Minkevitch, Newton
Daniel Sayles, Meriden
Chandler Smith, Overland Park
Stephen Springfield, Wichita
Chase Ward, Cunningham

Merchant Marine Academy (Kings Point, NY)
Joseph Borra, Hays
Evan Key, Overland Park

 Senator Roberts will begin accepting applications in March for nominations to academy classes entering in July 2012. Applications at that time should be directed to Karin Wisdom at Senator Roberts’ Wichita office (155 North Market St., Suite 120, Wichita, KS 67202 or 316-263-0416).
