Washington, D.C. – The following is a transcript of an interview from December 14, 2010 of Senator Wyden by news anchor Lawrence O’Donnell:

SEN. RON WYDEN, (D) OREGON: Larry, first of all, yesterday was the premier business event in our home state, the Oregon Business Summit. I was one of the founders. So, that was why I wasn`t able to get back. I was still in the air.

And I will tell you with respect to tomorrow, while it`s not an easy decision, I intend to vote no. This legislation tomorrow clearly has short-term stimulative benefits. I support protecting the middle class and small business, I support the unemployment extension, I support the earned income tax break.

But as you know from working in the Senate, so often the Senate takes steps in the short term that become the enemy of the long term. And my concern is with this legislation we will be having exactly the same debate in the lame duck session of 2012.

I`m looking at my watch, Larry. It`s 10:30. It`s the night of December 14th. At some point in the United States Senate, you have got to break the culture of procrastination. I think that time is now.

 There are obviously tough calls for the president. Let me tell you, first of all, I have suggested to the White House on a number of occasions in the last month that they extend the Bush tax cuts, which I have opposed from the very beginning, for a year in order to force the United States Congress to step up and between now and December 31st, 2011, get serious about tax reform and spending reform.

As you know from being involved in tax reform, Larry, it works. What you need to do is go in there, clean out those special interest tax breaks, hold down rates for everybody and keep progressivity. And the reality is, and you can remember this from `86 and `87, it will create millions more jobs than we saw during the Bush years.

 Twenty senators today have indicated that they`ll push hard on a bipartisan basis for tax reform in 2011. But there`s no question in my mind that the decision made on the Senate floor tomorrow will make it harder.

Once you have propped up this system that is in effect built on scores and scores of special interest tax break, how do you then go to those special interests and say, gosh, we`re going to take away the particular tax break that you might enjoy in order to have more economic growth for everybody, including you?

I do think tomorrow`s decision will make tax reform harder, but the president has told me that he`s going to keep pushing for it, and there are 20 senators of both political parties that want to work with him.

 I think this cake is baked, Larry. I have been interested in the question of exploring with senators of both political parties whether it might be possible to attach some consequences for inaction in 2011 on a sensible tax reform and spending reform. But I think at this point, the cake is baked. This measure is going to pass.

In my view, it is a victory for the politics of procrastination. I certainly think it`s a glimmer of hope that Senator Warner, Senator Chambliss, and a significant group of senators of both political parties will keep pushing in 2011, but certainly we`re going to have our work cut out for us.

 Larry, first of all, I campaigned on exactly the program I`m outlining tonight, and that I pushed forward with the president of the United States. I told everybody in this past fall election campaign when I was re-elected, I said what I wanted to see was a short term extension of the Bush tax cuts, and then finally end this culture of delay and procrastination in the Senate in 2011.

This town will never do anything because there`s always an election coming up, there`s special interest groups that have to be satisfied, and polls -- unless you have deadlines and consequences for inaction. I campaigned exactly on what I talked about here tonight. I had a democratic co-chair and a Republican co-chair in every one of Oregon`s 36 counties. So I`m being true to the principles I ran on.

