Today U.S. Senator Russ Feingold and several Wisconsin businesses highlighted the new Early Retiree Reinsurance Program that is part of the new health insurance reform law.  Prior to enactment of the law, many employers struggled to provide good, affordable health care coverage for retired employees.  Now, more than 90 Wisconsin businesses, unions, employers, school districts, cities and counties are eligible to start receiving relief from this early retiree program, which provides reimbursement for medical claims for early retirees and their spouses and dependents. The savings Wisconsin businesses receive from this program can be used to reduce employer health care costs and provide premium relief to their workers and families. 

“Health insurance premiums for older Americans can be more than four times as expensive as premiums for young adults, making early retirement an extremely risky decision for many, simply based on health care costs,” Feingold said. “This program will help Wisconsin businesses save money while also ensuring early retirees continue to have good, affordable health care. I am pleased to see so many Wisconsin companies taking advantage of one of the many important benefits of the historic health insurance reform law.” 

Kerry Arent, VP for Human Resources at Appleton Papers Inc. said, “The early retiree reinsurance program should help reduce future retiree healthcare increases for all of Appleton's pre-Medicare retirees who currently pay a portion of the premium.  This is an attractive benefit of health care reform.” 

Mary Nick, Chief Human Resources Officer at Meriter Health Services said, “Due to the rising cost of care, offering health insurance to current and retired employees is getting increasingly difficult.  The Early Retiree Reinsurance Program will help us contain cost increases and make providing much needed coverage to retirees more affordable.”

The current list of Wisconsin companies that are enrolled in the Early Retiree Assistance Program can be viewed below or at http://www.healthcare.gov/law/provisions/retirement/states/wi.html. 
 

Alaska Carpenters Health & Welfare Trust Fund
Appleton Papers Inc.
Bay Area Medical Center
Board of School Directors - Milwaukee Public Schools
Board of Trustees - Milwaukee Painters Local Union
Board of Trustees - Wisconsin Laborers Health Fund
Board of Trustees of Plumbers Local 75 Health Fund
Local Unions Nos. 19 & 27 Health & Welfare Fund
Wisconsin Pipe Trades Health Fund
Briggs & Stratton Power Products Group, LLC
Brillion Iron Works, Inc
Calumet County
Case New Holland Inc.
City of Antigo
City of DePere
City of Green Bay
City of Neenah
City of Platteville
City of Waukesha
City of Wauwatosa
City of West Allis
City of Wisconsin Rapids
County of Adams
County of Dane
County of Marinette
County of Milwaukee
County of Outagamie
CUNA Mutual Insurance Society
D.C. Everest Area School District
Foley & Lardner, LLP
Fox Valley Sheet Metal Health Plan
Gehl Company
Great Northern Corporation
Green Bay Area Public School District
H G Weber and Company, Inc.
Harley-Davidson Motor Company Group, LLC
InSinkErator Division Emerson Electric Co
Iron Workers Local No 8 Welfare Fund
Ironworkers Local 383 Health Care Plan
Johnson Controls, Inc.
Jones Dairy Farm
Journal Communications, Inc.
Kenosha Building & Construction Trades Welfare Fund
Kimberly Area School District
Kimberly-Clark Corporation
Local Unions No. 19 & 127 Health & Welfare
Madison Area Technical College
Madison Gas and Electric Company
Manitowoc County
Manpower Inc
Marshall & llsley Corporation
Master Lock Company
Meriter Health Services
Middletown Works Hourly and Salaried Union Retiree
Mid-State Technical College District
Milwaukee Area Technical College
Milwaukee Carpenters District Council Health Fund
Milwaukee Drivers Health & Welfare Trust Fund
Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage-District
Milwaukee Roofers Health Fund
North Central States Regional Council of Carpenters
Northcentral Technical College
Northwestern Mutual Life Ins Co
Operating Engineers Local 169 Health Benefit Fund
Plumbers and Steamfitters Local 400
Portage Community Schools
ProHealth Care, Inc.
Racine County
Racine Unified School District
Rexnord LLC
Richardson Industries, Inc.
Rockwell Automation, Inc.
S.C. Johnson & Son, Inc
School District of Poynette
Sentry Insurance, a Mutual Company
Snap-on Incorporated
Strattec SecurityCorporation
ThyssenKrupp Waupaca, Inc.
Unified School District of Antigo
Washington County
Waukesha County Area Technical College District
Wausau Paper Corp.
Webcrafters, Inc.
WELS Voluntary Employees' Beneficiary Association
Wipfli LLP
Wisconsin Education Association Insurance Trust
Wisconsin Electric Power Company
Wisconsin Health Fund
Wisconsin Pipe Trades Health Fund
Wisconsin Sheet Metal Health & Welfare
