To honor the United States Army Command and General Staff College at Ft. Leavenworth’s 132 years of educating the nation’s military leaders, the Senate today unanimously passed Senators Roberts and Brownback’s Five-Star General’s Commemorative Coin Act. The bill requires the Secretary of the Treasury to mint coins in recognition of five United States Army Five-Star Generals.

“Kansas is proud to be the home of the oldest, largest and arguably the most prestigious military staff college in the United States. The school is a first class center of excellence for leadership development and joint operational education,” Senator Roberts said. “I am pleased the Senate approved my legislation to honor this institution and five outstanding five-star generals.”

Senator Brownback said, “Forth Leavenworth’s Command and General Staff College is one of the finest military institutions in the country. It is fitting that Congress passed legislation to commemorate the great contribution of the Command and General Staff College and the bravery of the five Army Five-Star Generals. These generals led battles that have protected America’s freedom, and for that we owe them a debt of gratitude.”

A multi-year effort, Senator Roberts authored the bill and he and Senator Brownback obtained seventy-four co-sponsors of the legislation, S. 455, The Five-Star General’s Commemorative Coin Act, which authorizes the minting of 100,000 five dollar coins; 500,000 one dollar coins; and 750,000 half-dollar coins that honors our nation’s five, Five-Star Generals. Numerous military officers who have become household names studied and served on Fort Leavenworth. Key among them are America’s five-star Generals: George C. Marshall, Douglas MacArthur, Dwight D. Eisenhower, Henry “Hap” Arnold, and Omar N. Bradley. These generals led American and Allied forces to victory over Nazism and fascism during World War II in Europe and the Pacific.

A surcharge will be applied to each coin in the amount of $35 for each $5 gold coin, $10 for each silver dollar coin, and $5 for each half-dollar clad coin. Proceeds from the sales of these coins will be directed to the Command and General Staff College Foundation, a not-for-profit organization that is chartered to support innovation and creativity at the Command and General Staff College by creating programs and activities that contribute to the Margin of Excellence at the college. There is no cost to the United States Treasury to produce the coins.

“I have visited the Command and General Staff College many times over the years as a Congressman and now a Senator,” Senator Roberts said. “I led the effort to build the new Lewis and Clark Center, the new home of the college, where a room was dedicated in my honor. I am constantly awed by what takes place there.

The Command and General Staff College has played a decisive role in the education and training of U.S. military officers in times of war and peace since its founding in 1881. The school continues to be the largest and most prestigious military staff college in the United States - the graduates (foreign and domestic) currently serve in leadership commands in Afghanistan and around the world.

Senator Sam Brownback (R-KS) is an original cosponsor of the legislation. Congresswoman Lynn Jenkins (R-KS) and Congressman Dennis Moore (D-KS) introduced similar legislation in the House of Representatives that passed in May. The bill now goes to the President to be signed into law.

Senator Roberts, a former Marine is an outspoken advocate for men and women in uniform.
