Mr. President, I rise today to honor a giant in the world of journalism: Furman Bisher.  

Last Saturday, after nearly 60 years of elegant observation of the sports world for the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, Furman pecked out his final column before retirement on the thinning keys of his trusty Royal typewriter.

His choice of instrument to convey his thoughts in this age of instantaneous, inane chatter says a lot about why newspaper readers, after all these years, have continued to seek out his column on the AJC's sports page.

It all comes down to this: Furman's graceful prose, courtly voice and sharp observations are unfailingly backed up by old-fashioned shoe-leather reporting. He gloried in doing his homework, making that extra call, interviewing one more player or assistant coach or trainer, in order to breathe even more life into the game or the race or the fight for his readers.

It's also why Furman has become a Georgia - and an American - institution.  

Simply put, Furman loved sports. And he loved journalism. At age 90, he was still driving out on summer nights to cover minor-league ballgames.

In his career, Furman scored many journalistic knockouts, including a 1949 interview with Shoeless Joe Jackson - the only one Jackson ever gave - regarding his involvement in the 1919 Black Sox scandal.

He got stock tips from Ty Cobb and watched Jack Nicklaus' 1986 Masters victory. He sat in the press box at countless Falcons games at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium and covered the Olympics, both winter and summer.

He wrote 11 books, including co-authoring two editions of a Hank Aaron autobiography. And at The Masters Tournament in Augusta every April, Furman reigned among the azaleas and oaks as the dean of the sports press corps.

In a testament to his longevity in a tough business, Furman has covered every Kentucky Derby since 1950, and every Super Bowl but the first one.

Furman even branched out into TV. Although I did not grow up in Atlanta, I have heard from many people that preachers across the city would cut sermons short so that their congregations could be home for Furman's kickoff on "Football Review."

Along the way, he earned the respect of his colleagues and the loyalty of his readers, garnering writing awards too numerous to mention. He served as president of the National Sportscasters and Sportswriters Association from 1974-1976, and of the Football Writers Association of America from 1959-1960. His features have appeared in The Saturday Evening Post, Golf Digest and Sports Illustrated, to name but a few.

In 1961, Time magazine named him one of the five best columnists in the nation. I would argue that even today, that honor still fits.

No less than the great Jack Nicklaus said of Furman's retirement: "He might be turning in his last column for the newspaper, but Furman will never stop writing or giving his opinion. I guess you could say that when it comes to the last writings of Furman Bisher, I will believe it when I don't see it."

Furman would close every column with a single valediction - the word "selah" - a Hebrew word that ends many Psalms and that exhorts the reader to reflect. 

It is appropriate, then, to reflect on Furman's long, fruitful career, one that began in Atlanta as the Korean War was starting, when Joe Louis was still boxing, when the Minneapolis Lakers were the NBA champs, before Willie Mays had joined the major leagues and before Sports Illustrated magazine even existed.

Ever since, with wit and style, Furman has chronicled the triumphs and the travails of the sports world and its often-all-too-human heroes.

Furman is leaving the AJC at almost 91 years old, and he is still going strong. While we may not be seeing his column anymore, I'm quite sure we haven't heard the last of Furman Bisher. As Furman would say, "Selah."

Mr. President, I'm thankful for Furman Bisher. And I yield the floor.
