As we begin to slowly emerge from the economic pitfalls of the worst recession that this country has seen in decades, the long-term issues that remain are real and affect Americans of all walks of life. Out-of-control government spending has resulted in a skyrocketing deficit, fueling fears of an unsustainable financial future for America.

A stifled-free market drags down our economic growth and impairs our ability to work toward reducing this enormous burden on our children and grandchildren's future. In spite of this volatile forecast, there are some here who feel that the best way to reinvigorate our economy is to impose heavier costs, higher fees, and greater taxes on businesses and individuals while forcing the federal government to oversee and manage health care in the United States - ultimately adding an additional one-sixth of our economy to the government's balance sheet.  

Now, make no mistake, this financial instability is not disconnected from Americans' everyday lives. It is being felt at bill-paying time, discussed at dinner tables, and it is weighing on the minds of the very people that drive this country's economy.  

The other side would have you believe that greater government control, increased spending, and less money in Americans' pockets is the way toward economic stability and growth. Since there has been no legislative language circulated on the proposed government takeover of health care at this point, we can only really consider the conceptual language as passed by the Senate Finance Committee. There are 1,502 pages of conceptual language from the Finance Committee that's being proposed as meaningful health care reform.  

This phantom health care proposal imposes half a trillion dollars in new taxes, fees, and penalties on individuals and businesses. While some would have you believe that these taxes will only be borne by the wealthy in the form of a 40% excise tax on high-value insurance plans, both the Congressional Budget Office and the Joint Committee on Taxation have testified that these taxes will almost entirely be passed on to the consumer, irrespective of their tax bracket.  

Under the tax provisions of this health care proposal, in my home state of Georgia, a young, healthy individual under certain health plans would see his monthly premium almost double. Additionally, $92 billion of this new burden will be in the form of new fees on manufacturers and importers of branded drugs and certain medical devices, as well as on health insurance providers. Again, all of this is going to be passed on to consumers, resulting in higher health insurance premiums and higher costs for health-related products.  

While a majority of the health reforms in the Finance Committee bill do not go into effect until 2013 - like the tax credit for health insurance and the individual mandate, both of which are designed to lower health care costs - these so-called fees are effective on January 1 of next year. This means that health insurance in general will become more expensive before any government assistance or policies intended to make health insurance more affordable even take effect.  

Also included in the Senate Finance proposal is a tax on individuals without essential health benefits coverage which would subject individuals who fail to maintain government-approved health insurance to a penalty of $750 per adult in the household. And while Democrats claim that this bill contains savings for the low- to middle-class families, the Congressional Budget Office has stated that almost half of those families paying this tax would be between 100 and 300 percent of the federal poverty level, or a family of four earning between $22,800 and $68,400 in 2013.  

Additionally, proponents of this bill say it reduces the deficit while providing relief from high health care costs for lower-income families. However, what they don't tell you is that under their refundable tax credits, families who earn nearly four times the federal poverty level will have almost 91 percent of their health care costs paid for by the other taxpayers. The independent Congressional Budget Office estimates that by 2019, out of 253 million Americans with health insurance, only 18 million will be eligible for these tax credits to purchase insurance. So this supposed health care cost-reducing tax credit at the heart of the Democrats' health care reform is only available to 7 percent of the population. Increasing taxes on 91 percent of Americans to pay for 7 percent of the population is not reform. It's business as usual.  

While I am in favor of tax credits to purchase health insurance, I do not support placing limitations on who can receive such credits or what type of coverage they can purchase. If increasing the size of government even more in the health care sphere isn't going to make matters worse, who do you think is going to administer, implement and enforce these tax increases? The Internal Revenue Service. With a new influx of complex health care policies being legislated through the tax code, the I.R.S. would be tasked with overseeing all aspects of the millions of taxpayers now burdened with even more filings to the I.R.S. Additionally, the I.R.S. would likely be entrusted with enforcing these new provisions as well as protecting against fraud in certain cases.  

These new responsibilities of the internal revenue service would mean only one thing: a bigger and more intrusive I.R.S.  

I am in support of reforming the health care system in this country because we do have problems. We need greater transparency in health care costs, increased competition, more individual portability for peace of mind for those who change jobs, a better focus on prevention and wellness, and real reform of the health insurance industry. Republican-backed plans do exactly that.  

There are ways to lower health care costs and be more fiscally responsible, and there are opportunities to pay for this coverage without expanding entitlements and increasing taxes on middle-class Americans. 

Americans deserve a patient-centered approach to health care reform. The 1,502 pages that's being discussed behind closed doors by the majority leader and other Democrats, puts politicians and bureaucrats in charge of the health care industry in this country, and that is not what the American people want or deserve.
