Mr. President, I come to the floor this morning to talk about the current pending business before this body. This is an issue which obviously raised its ugly head a couple of years ago with the financial meltdown that occurred in this country, and I think all of us in this body agree that it's imperative that the senate take action to try to make sure that what happened to the financial industry in America never has the opportunity to happen again.

 

And I would commend senator Dodd, Senator Shelby for their work on this bill. We've had our disagreements, but yet we've had significant agreement on some areas. we're now trying to take the base bill and make that bill a bill that all of us in this body hopefully will wind up being able to support because we've improved the bill to the point it really addresses the root cause of the problem that arose during 2007, 2008 and on into 2009 and 2010.

 

There are some provisions in the bill that I have particular objection to, and there are some things that are not in the bill that I think should be in the bill. for example, one of the major causes of the problem -- and I think it goes without saying -- is the fact that the GSE's -- Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac -- have been authorized over the years to purchase mortgages from individuals who simply couldn't make their payments, and those mortgages have been bundled up together and have been sold on the market and have been one of the root causes, in my opinion, of the problem. And I'm not by myself in thinking about that. Other individuals, but more importantly, people who know a lot more about the root cause of the problem than anybody in this body agrees that that is a major issue that has to be addressed in any overall financial reform. And to leave any reference to the GSE's -- Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae -- out of any additional regulation I think is a mistake.

 

There are going to be amendments with respect to that, and I look forward to the debate on that. Another issue is that there are no mortgage standards that are specifically set forth in the underlying bill. I can remember very well going in and buying my first house, making application for a mortgage. I was nervous as I could be. Even though my payment was going to be fairly minimal to the amount of money I was making, I had to pay 20% down. It took me a couple of weeks to be approved by individuals in my hometown that I knew very well. And at the end of the day, they just wanted to make sure I was going to be able to pay that loan back. not that we need to go all the way in that direction, but certainly we need standards in place that are going to ensure that people who are buying houses can afford to make the mortgage payments that they are making application for.

 

And with respect to the consumer financial protection act, it appears that in the underlying bill there is an umbrella that is cast out there that is going to require the inclusion of more non-problem areas of the consumer finance industry than are really in any way potentially a part of any future financial meltdown. So I hope that as we debate these amendments -- and I know we'll have a very spirited debate on them -- that we can come to some agreement as to what's reasonable. let's do what we need to do to provide our regulatory agencies with the additional oversight they need to make sure that we put them in a position and give them the tools not to allow the situation that occurred in 2007, 2008, and 2009 to reoccur, but that we don't go too far to where we overreach and exercise more control on the part of the regulators than what is absolutely necessary.

 

I want to speak for just a minute about the derivatives section and some amendments that we're going to have on that particular title. The agriculture committee has jurisdiction over swaps and derivatives by virtue -- and derivatives by virtue of the fact that we have jurisdiction over commodities future and trading commission. There are some swaps and derivatives that are secured by securities themselves.

 

Those securities being regulated by the SEC. gives the SEC. some jurisdiction here. That been part of the discussion here and will continue to be as we go through the debate. but there are a couple of things that I particularly want to address that I think are a faulty in the base bill that need to be corrected as we go through it. and we're going to have a substitute amendment for the derivatives title that will do several things that are of primary importance to the industry that today is very unregulated that will bring all of the derivatives trades out of the shadows and in a total transparent manner now make those trades available to the regulators so they can look not only at the trades themselves to make sure that entities that are entering into those trades are the right kind of entities that ought to be trading and that they are not creating systemically risky industries that will have the potential to create situations similar to what we saw in 2007-2008, but also that the agencies, the regulators will have the ability to call into play additional margin requirements or other tools that they will have to ensure that those entities that are engaging in these practices don't ever reach that point of being systemically risky. There are some specific provisions that we need to look at.

 

One of those is an expansion of what we call the end user provision. an end user is an individual, whether it -- or an entity, whether it's a manufacturing company could be an individual, but for the most part it's a financial entity, usually a manufacturer of some sort that doesn't engage in the finance end of the economy of our country but does seek to hedge its own particular financial issues in the more productive, more conventional financial industry itself.

 

For example, a manufacturer like john Deere or caterpillar or ford motor company or any, for that matter, manufacturer across the country seeks to have stability in the marketplace with respect to interest rates, because they don't look at 90 days, 120 days. They look at years into the marketplace to ensure that there's stability from an interest rate standpoint so that they know how to purchase items, they know how to price their vehicles that they make or the widgets they make or whatever it may be. And those manufacturers engage in the purchase of derivatives by hedging the interest rate that they're going to pay. They also hedge the purchase of metals. Ford motor company, for example, may hedge the purchase of steel in the steel market so that they can ensure themselves of some stability in that market.

 

These are the type of derivatives that we're going to be talking about and that we need to make sure because they were not part of the problem that caused the financial meltdown, but if we're not careful they're going to be overregulated to the point to where the cost of an automobile is going to be increased. And that's an unintended consequence, I know, of this bill. The cost of a john Deere tractor to one of my farmers is going to be increased. Again, an unintended consequence.

 

I want to take just a minute to read a portion of a letter, an unsolicited letter I got from a fairly new bank in Atlanta that is a community bank that began in 2007. And according to the chairman of the board, has built an exceptionally strong balance sheet with superior asset quality, solid and stable deposit funding. At the end of the quarter their equity to asset ratio was 14.39%. Very significant, very substantial, very stable. The regulatory approval to offering has been offering interest rate derivatives to middle market clients who are concerned about the effects of rising interest rates on their businesses. This affords our clients an opportunity to fix interest rates in what would otherwise be a floating rate environment which could work against them. The bank will not take interest rate risk on these derivative contracts but instead will hedge all trades with one of our correspondent bank counterparties. In other words, the bank will operate a match loan level hedging program. The bank does not otherwise engage in any derivatives activities.

 

There are three key problems from our perspective with the regulation drafted by the senate agriculture committee, which is a part of the base bill that we are debating now. One, the bank would likely be considered a swap dealer under section 50-A and will have to spin off or terminate its swap activity. Two, there are no practical end user exemptions for our clients who would be subject to posting margin against their trades with a clearinghouse. Three, all swap parties have to be an eligible participant so a real estate private partnership would not qualify.

 

it makes no sense that community and regional banks that run matched loan level hedging programs should be subject to the swap dealer provisions as such programs are fully hedged and are not taking undue risk. and the letter goes on just to simply say that they hope as we go through the debate on this that we can fix these unintended consequences that really provide practical issues in the day to day operation of commercial and community banks that are not on wall street, but are in Atlanta, in Moultrie, and other communities around my state and every other community in America. Just because a bank is big does not mean that bank is risky. And we need to remember as we think about this that our regulators need to have the right kinds of tools to look at every single trade that comes up. That's why it's important and why we agree on both sides of the aisle that there needs to be 100% transparency in these markets. And we're going to provide for that in our substitute.

 

There needs to be a fixing of the definition in the underlying bill of what is a major swap participant. And there again, that goes to the issue of whether you're a big bank, you're automatically systemically risky -- which is not the case, but you're automatically covered by this provision. Should Wall Street be covered? Yes. Will they be covered in the base bill? Yes. Will they be covered in our amendment? Yes. every swab dealer on wall street needs -- every swap dealer on wall street needs to have not just 100% transparency but needs to have all of their transactions with other financial institutions go through a clearinghouse. That's done in the base bill. That is also provided in our amendment. but what we want to make sure of is that these end users who don't deal in these swaps on a daily basis and the kind of volume that the banks do are not thrown had into a category of all of a sudden having to pay huge fees and huge costs added to the cost of doing business that they don't have today. Because at the end of the day we know who's going to pay for that. It's us consumers who buy the widgets and buy the automobiles or whatever it may be.

 

The last issue I want to talk about is the provision in the bill that requires, it's called section 106 or the 716 provision. What this provision does is to require all swaps dealers and financial institutions to be physically moved out of the financial institution and kind of operate on its own. Here's the practical effect of what that's going to do. Any Wall Street bank that's a swap -- a dealer in swaps and derivatives today -- and every one of them are -- is simply going to take their swaps desk, and they're going to move it across the street. Under the base bill, they're going to be required to earn huge amounts of capital for that swaps dealer desk.

 

There really is no reason for that to happen. If they're going to be required to raise capital, it ought to be in the bank where they can use that money to be able to loan that money out to their customers. And the other, I think, truly unintended consequence of moving the swaps desk out is the fact that the financial institution itself, again, major banks are going to be included in this, those individual banks are not going to be able to access the discount window at the fed because they're all of a sudden not going to be able to borrow money from any federal entity under the language that's in the bill, in the underlying bill. That doesn't make sense. And the reason it doesn't make sense is that all of these swaps and derivatives transactions, whether interest rates, whether metals or whatever the transaction may be, have to be cleared every day. And the bank needs -- or the swap dealer needs a huge amount of cash in order to clear those trades. If they don't have access to the fed discount window, they're simply not going to be able to access the amount of cash they need to clear these transactions. and the reason they need that cash is to ensure that the parties to that transaction are going to in fact be able to have the assurance that the other party to the transaction is going to be able to live up to its rights and obligations. To access that cash that they're going to need to make sure that these transactions are in fact cashed out at the end of every single day.

 

So, Mr. President, we're going have one amendment that will be a substitute, and then we'll have a series of additional amendments that will be more in the way of rifle shots to address the specific issues that I've talked about here, and I talked with the chairman of the banking committee about these over a period of time. Obviously I've talked with my friend, Senator Lincoln, about this. and as we go through this debate, I want to make sure that at the end of the day, we do exactly what all of us want to do and what certainly the chairman and senator Shelby set out to do from the start, which is to protect consumers. To protect people who lost a lot of money in the market because of transactions of greed that took place on Wall Street. And we can do that in a bipartisan way because we all agree that that's got to be done.

 

but the thing we want to make sure of is that that umbrella or that reaching out to accomplish that particular part of the problem that exists does not look for other problems that don't exist on main street and that we have the ability of our community banks, our main street banks, as well as our manufacturing sector, to have access to the swaps and derivatives markets that they have done in a commercially responsible way for decades, and they are not part of the problem, but yet it's going to be of a significant consequence to every manufacturer and not every community bank engages in swaps and derivatives transactions but a lot of them do. And we need to make sure that we take into consideration the continued ability of those banks to operate in a normal commercial banking way. And under the base bill, they're simply not going to be able to do that.

 

So I commend the chairman for his hard work on this. I know he and Senator Shelby are still trying to work out some agreements on the too-big-to-fail issue. and it is my understanding that some of the provisions in the hopeful agreement that they are talking about is going to have a direct impact on some of the things that I've talked about here today, and it'll make our job a little bit easier of trying to fix the derivatives title this bill.

 

With that, Mr. President, I would I thank the chairman.
