Mr. President, I rise today to urge my colleagues to join me and my fellow Georgian, Senator Isakson, in honoring the life and commitment of 1st Lt. Robert Collins of Tyrone, Ga.  

 

While many other young Americans his age were headed back to school from spring break, Lt. Collins died April 7, 2010, when an improvised explosive device detonated near his vehicle on the streets of Mosul, Iraq. He was 24 years old.

 

Lt. Collins was both a native Georgian, and was based in Georgia.

 

He hailed from the small town of Tyrone in Fayette County, where he played football under the Friday night lights at Sandy Creek High School, where he became a standout student that would take him to the halls of West Point, and where attended Hopewell United Methodist Church with his family on Sunday mornings.

 

Later, he became a member of the local American Legion Post 105 in Fayetteville, Ga.

 

For me, the death of Lt. Collins is particularly sobering. Robert was one of my first nominees to the United States Military Academy at West Point in the fall of 2003, and was offered an appointment there the following spring. He graduated from West Point in 2008. 

 

He became an officer in B Company, 1st Battalion, 64th Armor Regiment, 3rd Infantry Division based at Fort Stewart, Ga. He deployed to Iraq in the autumn of 2009.

 

Lt. Collins served as his platoon’s commander. While in Iraq, his unit was charged with improving security and the quality of life for the Iraqi people. He and his men also provided security for the recent, successful Iraqi elections. They were dedicated to the goal of a democratic Iraq, and sought to help its people lead normal, safe lives.

 

Robert’s friends have described him as a man of great compassion and a natural leader who found his calling in the honor and patriotism of the Army. He performed his duties courageously, devotedly, without hesitation and without reservations. He was, after all, a soldier.

 

As a small token of gratitude and remembrance for Lt. Collins’ sacrifice, I am pleased to join Senator Isakson in urging our colleagues to rename the post office in Tyrone, Ga., as “The 1st Lt. Robert Wilson Collins Post Office Building” in Lt. Collins’ honor.  

 

Nothing we can do could ever repay the debt we owe to Lt. Collins and thousands of young Americans like him.  

 

But this will ensure that his name lives on, not just in his friends’ and family’s hearts, but in the very heart of his hometown.

 

Mr. President, I yield the floor.
