Amid the holiday season and in the wake of new U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) data showing nearly one in seven Ohio families to be “food insecure,” U.S. Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-OH) and Columbus Mayor Michael Coleman thanked volunteers and helped distribute food at the Near Northside Emergency Material Assistance Program Food Pantry (NNEMAP) in Columbus on Monday. Brown also released a report showing the increased demand for services provided by food pantries and banks in the central Ohio area.

 “This Thanksgiving, many of us will be fortunate enough to enjoy a satisfying—if not entirely healthful—holiday meal. But every day hundreds of thousands of families in Ohio and millions more nationwide struggle to put food on the table,” Brown said. “During the holiday season—and year-round—food pantries like NNEMAP and the Mid-Ohio Foodbank provide an invaluable service to thousands of Ohioans who would otherwise go hungry.

 “We learned last week that a staggering one in seven Ohio families don’t have enough access to food, and we know that many Ohioans live in ‘food deserts’ where they cannot easily access fresh, nutritious produce,” Brown continued. “To date this year, NNEMAP has served nearly 14,000 people each month—an increase of 16 percent from 2008. We must do more to combat hunger and make sure that Ohioans can continue to put food on the table for their families.”

 According to the USDA, the term “food security” refers to the “assured access to enough food for an active, healthy life.”  In particular, this food should be nutritious, safe, and easily obtainable through normal channels.

Brown has been a leader in the Senate on issues relating to hunger and nutrition. As Chairman of the Senate Agriculture Subcommittee on Hunger, Nutrition, and Family Farms, Brown helped craft the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010, which the Senate passed in August. That same month, Brown joined community leaders in Youngstown to outline efforts to fight childhood hunger and eradicate “food deserts.” 

With Mayor Coleman, Brown was also joined by Roy Clark, Director of NNEMAP; Evelyn Behm, Senior Vice President, Mid-Ohio Foodbank; and Jen Bowden, Director of Government Relations Mid-Ohio Foodbank.

NNEMAP, one of the largest food pantries in Franklin County, was established in 1969 as a cooperative ministry of over 30 churches distributing food and material assistance to needy residents of the near northside of Columbus. Their food supply comes from private donations and the Mid-Ohio Food Bank. To learn more about NNEMAP visit their Web site by clicking here.
