U.S. Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-OH) released the following statement today after the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) made an announcement regarding implementation of the new health care law.  This week, HHS announced that new health care provisions requiring health insurers to spend 80 to 85 percent of consumers’ premiums on direct care for patients—known as “medical loss ratio” requirements—would take effect starting in 2011.

 “This new provision will ensure that health care consumers in Ohio and across America get a bigger bang for their health care buck,” Brown said. “Instead of spending consumers’ hard-earned dollars on executive salaries or advertising, health insurers will now be required to use those premium dollars on medical care for patients and efforts to improve that care. It’s another way that the new health care law is giving consumers—and not insurers—the upper hand when it comes to health insurance.”

 According to HHS, many insurance companies today spend a substantial portion of consumers’ premium dollars on administrative costs and profits, including executive salaries, overhead, and marketing. Thanks to the new health care law, consumers will receive more value for their premium dollar because insurance companies will be required to spend 80 to 85 percent of premium dollars on medical care and health care quality improvement, rather than on administrative costs, starting in 2011. If they don’t, the insurance companies will be required to provide a rebate to their customers starting in 2012.

 In 2011, the new rules will protect up to 74.8 million insured Americans and estimates indicate that up to 9 million Americans could be eligible for rebates starting in 2012 worth up to $1.4 billion.  Average rebates per person could total $164 in the individual market. Important details regarding the new regulation are included below.

 Beginning in 2011, the new health care law will require insurance companies publicly report how they spend premium dollars, providing meaningful information to consumers. Also beginning in 2011, insurers are required to spend at least 80 percent of the premium dollars they collect on medical care and quality improvement activities.  Insurance companies that are not meeting the medical loss ratio standard will be required to provide rebates to their consumers.  Insurers will be required to make the first round of rebates to consumers in 2012.  The new health care law required the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) to develop uniform definitions and methodologies for calculating insurance companies’ medical loss ratios.  This week’s regulation certifies and adopts the recommendations submitted to HHS on October 27, 2010 by the NAIC. 

 More information about the medical loss ratio is available at Healthcare.gov.
