U.S. Senator Thad Cochran (R-Miss.) today said he remains hopeful the Senate will find the votes this year to repeal a mandate included in the new health care reform law that requires businesses, local governments, churches and charities to file Internal Revenue Service (IRS) forms for business transactions exceeding $600.

Without a congressional repeal, businesses, local governments, churches and charities in January will be compelled to use IRS 1099 tax forms to substantiate all business transactions of more than $600 a year for goods, property and services.

“Turning back this mandate will assure small businesses that they can devote more of their time and resources toward creating jobs and expanding the economy rather than filing IRS forms,” Cochran said.
 
“This section of the health care law creates a paperwork nightmare for small businesses, local governments and other organizations.  It is an onerous mandate that did not need to be part of health care reform, and I remain hopeful that enough Senators will support repealing this mandate before it goes into effect early next year,” he said.

Cochran on Monday voted for an amendment to fully repeal the IRS 1099 reporting requirements in the health care law.  While supported by 61 Senators, the amendment offered by Nebraska Senator Mike Johanns (R-Neb.) did not reach the 67-vote threshold needed to be considered as an amendment to the FDA Food Safety and Modernization Act (S.510).

The Johanns amendment was paid for by rescinding unobligated or unspent funding from federal accounts, not including defense and veterans accounts.  The White House Office of Management and Budget estimates that these accounts held about $684 billion in unobligated or unspent funds at the end of FY2010.

A similar 1099 repeal amendment to S.510 offered by Senator Max Baucus (D-Mont.) was not offset and would have added approximately $19 billion to the budget deficit.  Cochran did not support this amendment, which only garnered 44 votes in favor.
            
The Senate on Tuesday morning passed S.510 on a 73-25 vote.  Cochran did not support passage of the overall food safety measure due to spending and policy concerns with the bill, which must now be reconciled with a similar House-passed measure.
