Washington, DC—U.S. Senator Tim Johnson (D-SD), a member of the Senate Appropriations Committee and senior member of the Senate Banking Committee, today commented as the Senate passed a Continuing Resolution to fund the federal government through March 4, 2011. Opposition led by Senate Republicans last week prevented an Omnibus spending bill from moving forward that would have funded the federal government through 2011 and provided increased resources for the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) to help meet the new requirements included in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform law.

I’m pleased that the Senate has passed a Continuing Resolution, but I remain concerned with what passage of this measure, and the defeat of the annual appropriations bill last week, could mean to implementation of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform law. The success of this law and its ability to protect consumers and investors hinges on Congress providing increased funding for agencies like the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Under this funding bill, these agencies could face a lack of resources that ultimately leaves investors more vulnerable. As we begin the 112th Congress, I will continue working despite these constraints to see that important measures in reform to prevent investor fraud and dangerous speculation are enacted in a meaningful way as implementation of this law moves forward.   

POSSIBLE IMPACTS OF FULL-YEAR CR FOR THE SEC

A full-year continuing resolution would provide the SEC with approximately $1.111 billion to fund its FY 2011 operations. The effects on the SEC’s programs could include the following:

Impaired Securities Law Enforcement

 Quality tips and investigations will not be pursued due to a lack of resources.

 The SEC’s Enforcement program will be severely limited in how it can litigate enforcement matters. For example, potential negative implications include:

 Inability to hire expert witnesses for trial;

 Canceling or forgoing certain depositions, or failing to attend depositions noticed by defendants;

 Excluding key members of the litigation team from out-of-state depositions (i.e. not bringing the staff accountant to depositions of accounting professionals);

 Moving the court to stay a case or extend the discovery cut-off because the SEC is unable to fund the discovery.

 Without advancements in IT and specialized skill sets, the agency will be seriously undercut in its ability to pursue quickly evolving market practices, transactions and products in areas such as hedge funds, swaps, CDOs and other derivatives; complex market abuse activity, including in such areas as high-frequency trading, dark pools and other market structure issues; and complex insider trading and market manipulation schemes.

 The agency will be required to reduce its presence in various regions.

 Fewer funds will be returned to harmed investors.

 In 2010, the Commission distributed an estimated $2.2 billion to injured investors, which represents more than a 120 percent increase over the amounts distributed in 2008.

 Investors will be more vulnerable.

 In 2010, the SEC sought emergency relief from federal courts in the form of temporary restraining orders (TROs) to halt ongoing fraudulent conduct in 45 actions and sought 56 asset freezes in actions to preserve funds for the benefit of investors. In contrast, during FY2008, the SEC sought only 39 TROs and obtained asset freezes in only 46 actions. A significant decrease in funding levels will undermine this progress.

Exacerbated IT shortcomings

Until recent years, the SEC has suffered from underfunded and inconsistent technology budgets. As a result, the agency’s systems and infrastructure have suffered from many years of deferred modernization and enhancements, and lag far behind those of the industries we regulate. Budget cuts now would exacerbate the problem.

The agency has put significant resources over the past year toward establishing a centralized tracking and triage system for tips, complaints and referrals. Delays in completion of this system would limit the agency’s ability to systematically search, review and analyze tips, complaints and referrals.

 The GAO has cited the SEC for material weaknesses in its financial reporting, partly caused by outdated or ineffective financial management technology. Without funds to address IT shortcomings, these problems cannot be fixed.

Extremely limited inspection and compliance examinations

Right now the SEC can examine fewer than 1 of every 10 investment advisers each year. That means some mutual fund managers already go over a decade without having to open their books for regulatory inspection. Under a full-year CR, the SEC would be forced to conduct even fewer examinations of mutual fund managers, hedge fund managers and broker-dealers.

Impact on analysis capabilities

Delay ongoing actions to enhance risk identification and economic analysis capabilities of the agency – a function that is vital to understanding market events such as the May 6 crash and in support of an economically balanced approach to regulations.

Impact on public request

Backlog in requests for regulatory exemptions and no action letters. Having the ability to provide narrowly defined exemptions in appropriate circumstances is a key component of regulatory authority. Reductions in staff in the Commission’s Investment Management, Corporation Finance and Trading and Markets staff would seriously impact the timeliness of their responses to these requests.

Significant decrease in public company oversight

Significant reduction in the reviews of public filings of large financial institutions and structured finance.

Smaller and mid-sized companies would not be reviewed more often than once every three years.

New Responsibilities

The SEC is now tasked with establishing an effective regulatory system for the previously unseen and enormous OTC derivatives market and hedge fund markets. Without additional resources, the SEC would lack the capacity to fully implement these proposals.

The SEC is now tasked with additional regulatory responsibilities over credit rating agencies, including annual exams. Without additional resources, the SEC would lack the capacity to fully implement these proposals.

Lack of funding could prevent the SEC from being able to create the five new statutorily-mandated offices.
