Senator Tom Harkin (D-IA) today praised the U.S. Department of Labor’s (DOL) Division of Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation (DEEOIC) for sponsoring a traveling resource center in Ames on December 7th.  The Center will provide information on a recent directive stating that all employees of the Department of Energy, its predecessor agencies and its contractors and subcontractors who worked in any area of the Department of Energy facility at the Ames Laboratory from January 1, 1955 through December 31, 1960 for a consecutive 250 days fall into a cohort eligible for compensation.  
 
“I commend DOL for bringing this resource to Iowa, and for helping former employees of the Ames Laboratory understand their rights,” Harkin said.  “In the earliest days of the cold war, workers at the Ames Lab handled incredibly dangerous materials, and many developed cancer as a result.  We owe these workers a great debt for their contribution to our national security, and I am pleased to see the federal government following through on its commitment.”

The Traveling Resource Center will be held on Tuesday, December 7, 2010, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. at the Hilton Garden Inn, located at 1325 Dickinson Avenue in Ames.

In 2000 Harkin sponsored and Congress passed the Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Program Act (EEOICPA), which established a compensation program for former nuclear workers.  Since then, work has been underway to reconstruct radiation doses for workers across the country and to determine if workers who subsequently developed cancer and other illnesses likely developed the cancer as a result of radiation exposure.
 
In cases where the exposure levels for a group of workers cannot be accurately documented, Congress gave the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) Advisory Board on Worker and Radiation Health the authority to add the workers to a Special Exposure Cohort (SEC).  Workers included within a SEC are entitled to receive $150,000 in automatic compensation if they developed one of 22 specified cancers.  Groups of workers from Burlington, Iowa, Kentucky, Ohio, Alaska and Tennessee have already been designated as SECs.
 
In 2005, after years of effort by former workers, advocates and government officials, former Iowa Army Ammunition Plant workers from 1949 to 1974 that have one of 22 specified cancers were included in an SEC.  Approximately two-thirds of the eligible families have received this funding.

In June of 2006, the NIOSH Advisory Board recommended that workers from 1942 to 1954 be added to a Special Exposure Cohort (SEC) making them automatically eligible for compensation.  In September of that same year, HHS followed suit.
