WASHINGTON - U.S. Senator Tom Udall, D-NM, today joined a bipartisan majority of his Senate colleagues in approving important legislation to protect New Mexican families from food-borne illnesses by strengthening the nation's food safety system.

"Too many people in New Mexico and across the country have become ill in recent years due to a rash of food-borne illnesses nationwide. This legislation is long overdue, and will give New Mexico families the confidence that - when they sit down at their dinner table or a local restaurant - the food they eat is safe for their families," Udall said.

The FDA Food Safety Modernization Act - which Udall cosponsored - was approved 73-25, and now must be approved by the House of Representatives.

The legislation provides new food safety tools and updates food safety standards to ensure the safety of the nation's food supply. Among other things, the legislation will include:

More FDA inspections at all food facilities,
Enhanced tracking of high-risk foods,
Facilities must create a food safety plan that identifies, evaluates, and addresses contamination hazards,
Food importers must verify the safety of foreign suppliers and imported food.
The final legislation also included an important amendment introduced by Senator Jon Tester (D-MT), which Udall strongly supported, that exempts small, local processors - those who sell less than $500,000 a year - from the costly new measures intended for their large-scale counterparts.

"I heard from our small farmers and processors in New Mexico during our debate of this bill, and fought with Senator Tester to ensure that they would not be disproportionally hurt by these new requirements," Udall said. "Our small producers play a valuable role in New Mexico's economy and local traditions, and I believe this bill will allow them to continue to thrive."

Udall has long been an advocate for increased food safety. Last year, he introduced legislation that would give the U.S. Department of Agriculture authority to initiate mandatory recalls after a Denver-based grocery chain recalled more than 466,000 pounds of ground beef products that were distributed to stores in seven states, including New Mexico. Udall's legislation is pending before the Senate.
