Thank you Trish for hosting us today. You guys do great work.  I know that you were able to get important funding for dislocated worker and summer youth programs through the Recovery Act, and we’ll keep working with you to ensure that you can continue to meet the needs of the people you serve.   

And thank you Sandy for that introduction and for your leadership.

I thought I’d start by telling you how I got here. 

Not here today.  Today I took 94. 

But here to Minnesota.  When I was four years old, my dad moved our family from New Jersey to Albert Lea to open a small business - a quilting factory. Quilting is the material that’s used for the lining of winter coats. My dad had never had a career as such – he didn’t graduate from high school. But my grandfather – my mom’s dad – had a quilting factory out East and wanted to open one in the Midwest, and we ended up in Albert Lea, where my dad started this company called Mid-Continent Quilting.

Well, after two years, the factory failed, and we moved up to the Twin Cities and my dad became a printing salesman. Years later, I asked my dad, “Why Albert Lea?”

And he said, “well, the railroad went through Albert Lea, but it wouldn’t stop.”

My dad was not a good businessman. But he was a great guy. A sweeter man has never walked the earth.  But he was not a great businessman.

Now, maybe if we had been as smart as the Dalheimers, and started a beer distribution company, we’d have done better.  Apparently, even in Minnesota, if the choice is between winter coats and cold beer, cold beer is the better line of work. 

Now, whether it’s the ill-fated Mid-Continent Quilting Company, or the long-prospering Dalheimer Distributing Company, small businesses are important.  Over the last 15 years in this country, small businesses have generated nearly two out of every three jobs created in this country. 

But there’s another truth, which is that even in the best of times, small businesses have to push forward against some really stiff headwinds. 

I’ll use my time today to mention just two of them: 

1)    The unsustainable rise in the cost of health care;

2)    Finding and hiring well-trained and well-educated employees. 

And if there are other things you want to talk about, I’ll be happy to discuss them with you in the Q and A afterwards. 

First, health care. What do we know about health care as it relates to small business?   

We know that health insurance costs, on average, 18 percent more for a small business than a large business.   

And we know, according to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, that 60 percent of the uninsured in America work for small businesses. 

So if you can fix health care for small businesses, you not only make it a lot easier for a small business to succeed, you also make a big dent in the number of uninsured. 

The health care bill we just passed helps small businesses in a number of ways. 

The first and biggest is that, starting this year, small businesses that pay at least half of their employees’ total premium will be eligible for tax credits for up to 35 percent of their contribution.  And it will only grow – the tax credit is slated to go up to 50 percent by 2014. 

In Minnesota, over 77,000 small businesses  -- which employ over 330,000 Minnesotans -- will be eligible for these tax credits.   

Here’s the concept: 

Let’s say that you pay at least half of your workers’ premiums during the year.  When you’re filing your taxes at the end of the year, you take up to 35 percent of the amount you paid in premiums, and you get that as a tax credit. 

And here’s what it means in practice. 

Say you’re an auto-repair shop, with 10 full-time employees, each one getting paid $25,000 per year.  A $250,000 payroll.  And as an employer, say you pay an additional $70,000 in health care costs.  These are pretty average numbers.  Under the bill we just passed, this year, you’d be able to get a tax credit of $24,500. 

So the tax credit is a big part of the health reform we passed, and it kicks in when you’re paying taxes next year.

The second way this improves health care for small businesses is by creating health insurance exchanges.   The exchanges will be a menu of health insurance options for small businesses and individuals.  The exchanges won’t kick in until 2014, but when they do, here’s what will happen.   If you have fewer than 100 employees, you’ll be able to go to a state-based exchange Web site and compare all the available plans by cost and quality.  Instead of your risk pool being 21 people, or however many people you employ, it could be tens of thousands of people, which is less expensive. 

The third way this bill improves health care for small businesses is by ending price discrimination against small businesses with sick workers.  We all know that if you’re a small business, and you have one worker that gets sick, health care costs for everybody go up.  Actually, that can happen if something good happens, too, like someone getting pregnant.  This law says that health insurers can’t charge you more for having sicker workers, and can’t raise your rates when someone gets sick.   

The fourth way this bill helps small businesses is by getting at this issue of “job lock.”  What is job lock?  When someone is sick, or has someone in their family who is sick or has a preexisting condition, they can’t leave their job, or switch their job, or start a new business without losing their health care coverage.  This is one of the fears I hear about when I go all around our state.   

During the campaign, I met a young man in his late twenties. His dream his whole life had been to start a small business.  But he had a problem.  He had fallen in love with a beautiful young woman who has cystic fibrosis.  That’s a very serious disease.  It used to be a death sentence, but they’ve made some great advancements and she was able to get a lung transplant.

That was paid for by Minnesota Care. Now because she has a serious pre-existing condition, they knew if they got married that he would never be able to start a small business, because they'd never be able to get health insurance. But they wanted to marry and they did, and they were able to have affordable health insurance because he stayed with his employer, the Yellow Pages. You know what he does at the Yellow Pages? He sells listings and ads to small businesses. Because he loves small business. But when I met him, he was resigned to never being able to start a small business of his own, because his wife has cystic fibrosis. 

So here’s a guy who wanted to start a small business.  He couldn’t.  He wanted to.  You know, we’re an entrepreneurial society.  You’re all entrepreneurs.  My dad was an entrepreneur.  Not a good one, but still. He tried. But because of our health insurance system, we’ve cut off the entrepreneurial ideas of a huge segment of our population.  

With this health care bill, we’re going to unleash this energy, unlock it, and hopefully find the next Dalheimers, or the next Midwest Precision Machining.  The kind of small- and medium-sized businesses that are the foundation of communities like Monticello.

Fifth, this bill reduces the “hidden tax” on small businesses that pay for health insurance – actually, everybody who pays for health insurance.  Right now, the cost of treating the uninsured adds a hidden tax of over $1,000 to every health care premium in this country.  When someone without insurance goes to the emergency rooms to get their primary care, it’s expensive, it’s inefficient, they don’t pay – and we absorb the cost.  By covering an additional 32 million Americans by 2019, our health care reform will significantly reduce this cost.   

There are other provisions in there that will help, too.  There’s a rate review provision that kicks in and ensures that insurers publicly disclose any premium increase before it takes effect, and also forces them to justify why they’re increasing the premium.  There’s a $200 million grant program so that small businesses can do what big businesses do, and start wellness programs for their employees. 

This is a good bill for Minnesota.  It’s good because over a half million Minnesotans who don’t have insurance will be able to get it.  56,000 Minnesotans with pre-existing conditions won't be denied coverage.  And a half-million children will be able to stay on their parents’ plans until they are 26. 

And it’s also good for Minnesota because Minnesota is always near the top when it comes to providing high quality care at low cost compared to the rest of the country. 

But right now, we get punished for it.   Let me give you a couple of numbers.  Minnesota gets paid roughly $6,000 per Medicare recipient.  In Texas, it’s roughly $9,500 per Medicare recipient.  And they have far worse outcomes.  Part of the bill – something that I fought for and something that Senator Klobuchar fought for – is called the value index.  The idea is that if a clinic or hospital or doctors deliver quality, they’ll get rewarded for it. 

This isn’t about Minnesota vs. Texas.  It’s about incentivizing quality over quantity, value over volume.   

There’s a reason this bill was 2,200 pages long – there’s a lot of good stuff in there. 

Supporting small business also means making sure there are good people for you to hire.  And that means making sure our students learn the skills to do the jobs you need them to do, and that people who are looking for jobs can gain those skills. 

I know that a lot of you invest a significant amount in the training of your workers.  I’m told that Midwest Precision Machining here in Monticello is a case-in-point, a family-owned business that produces products for the aerospace, defense, and medical industries.  They are rooted in this community, believe in the community, and – if given the chance – want to hire from the community.   

I would add that Midwest Precision Machining is not as encompassing a name as Mid-Continent… but they are much more successful. 

I’m particularly concerned about the skilled worker shortage in manufacturing. With the unemployment rate as high as it is, it’s tragic that we have well-paying jobs in the manufacturing sector that need to be filled and workers who desperately need the jobs, but lack the training to fill them.   

And it’s even more tragic that we have machining programs at technical colleges closing, like the program at Central Lakes College in Staples.  

We do make things in this country, and we’re going to continue to make them.   

We have to start teaching that manufacturing is alive and well, and making sure people can fill these jobs, which are high-skill and hands-on, and pay family-sustaining wages.   

I serve on the Senate Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee, and so I see one of my jobs as making sure America stays competitive in the global economy.   

This year, we’re going to start working to reauthorize ESEA, the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, which is also known as “No Child Left Behind.”    

I want to see us start building an education system that graduates more people into the workforce with a stronger foundation of skills – not just the basics like math and reading, but also what policy makers call “higher-order” skills, like critical thinking, and creativity, and the ability to work in teams.   

This year, the Senate will also start working to reauthorize the Workforce Investment Act.  This is the law that helps to fund places like this. 

I’ll be relying on your input on how to make this work better for Minnesota businesses.   

And while we want to be sure you can find qualified workers, I think one of the most important things we can do in this difficult economy is make it easier – and more affordable – for you to invest in your business, and hire people.   

Already we’ve passed tax cuts to make it easier for you to invest and hire.  

For example, in the Recovery Act, small businesses were eligible for up to $52 billion in tax cuts.   

And just last month, the President signed into law the HIRE Act, which gives businesses an exemption from Social Security payroll taxes for every worker they hire from February 3rd through the end of the year, if they've been unemployed for at least 60 days.  It also extends so-called "Section 179" expensing to allow businesses to write-off up to $250,000 of some capital expenditures instead of depreciating them over time. 

This is a good start, but I think we can be doing more.

Last fall, the Minnesota Workforce Council Association came to me and told me about a program that Minnesota had put in place in the mid-80s.  It was called the Minnesota Emergency Employment Development, or MEED, and it got 7,400 workers back on the job in its first six months.  It went on to create 15,000 permanent long-term jobs.   

So, along with the Minnesota Workforce Council Association, we developed a national version of MEED, and what it does is offer wage subsidies instead of tax credits. 

My proposal says that if you hire a new person the federal government will pay 50 percent of their salary for a year. You have to hire them for 15 months. So the first nine months you get half their wages paid, up to a $12.00 an hour subsidy on a $24.00 an hour job.  

Then after the next six months, you get three months more. And the advantage of this is that it’s money right away; it’s not a tax credit where you have to pay cash up front – cash you may not have – and then wait until they file taxes to get the subsidy.   

My bill has the potential to create 500,000 jobs in a much more efficient way than a lot of other proposals.   That’s because it uses the existing workforce system infrastructure, rather than creating new administrative entities.   

We’ve seen it work.  I think of Jim Glowacki -- whose story epitomizes the incredible potential for this approach to spur job creation. 

In the mid 1980s, after he lost his job, Jim decided to start his own business—but he had few resources and little ability to borrow money.  He used Minnesota’s program to hire his first two employees—and now, his company, the JPG Group, employs 17 full time people and has an annual payroll of $800,000.

The Senate is likely to work on additional job creation bills this year, and I’ll be trying to get my proposal included in one of those.  It’s going to be an uphill battle. Some of my colleagues believe that short-term stimulus spending should be paid for, and even though my proposal would be funded by unused TARP funds, which should be going to Main Street instead of Wall Street anyway, some of my colleagues don’t like that idea.  But I’ll keep at it.  

If this bill passes, I know that the workforce system stands ready to implement this program in local communities across the state quickly and efficiently.  

We have so much more to talk about.  Roads, bridges.   Highway 25.  I’m happy to discuss anything in the Q&A. 

So let me end with this.   

We’re going through a rough patch, no doubt about that.  We have some daunting challenges ahead of us.  And a lot of them are made more daunting by a deficit that is frankly, frightening.  We’re in two wars now, and that’s part of this.  I’ve been to Iraq four times.  I’ve been to Afghanistan five times.  I know our troops, and I know we’re going to prevail. 

And I’m confident we’re going to come out of this period, stronger.  As a country, we have always managed to land on our feet. 

I think of my father, and the arc of his life.

My dad was born in 1908. 

When he was 21, the Great Depression started.

When he was 33, America entered World War II. 

(And, by the way, when the war ended, we were facing deficits even higher than we are today.)

And after the war, we learned that he was a terrible businessman.   

But the 50s and 60s were pretty darn good.   He moved up to St. Louis Park, got a job as a printing salesman, my mom got a job selling real estate, and together they were able to buy a two bedroom, one bathroom house. 

They were able to give my brother and me a great childhood, and send us to college.  My brother went to MIT… and became a photographer.  I went to Harvard and became a comedian.  (My poor, poor parents.)

But in their lives, we saw America go from some of its darkest hours to some of its best days. 

And we can do that again.

Yes, today, things can feel pretty dark.  We often focus on the challenges, the things we have going against us – and we should. 

But sometimes we also need to remember everything we have going for us.  We have some amazing assets. 

We have one of the most productive workforces in the entire world.
Half of the world’s skilled immigrants come here to work, and to build businesses.
We still lead the world in scientific and technological development – and we spend more on research and development than anyone else.
We always try to invent something new, or do something better – we file 350,000 patent applications every year.
As the world gets richer, demand for the things we’re very good at inventing – whether it’s a new movie or a new technology – will only grow.
And we care deeply about lifting up our fellow Americans and strengthening our communities, which you see in the rising participation in organizations like City Year and Teach for America.
We have young people, like my son Joe (named for his grandfather, but hopefully a better businessman) who are going back to school – my son is starting graduate school in engineering and business at MIT, my brother’s alma mater, because he want to build things in this country again. 
 

So I’m optimistic about our future.   And when I look at all of you, the work you’re doing, and the commitment to the community you’re showing – and the partnership I hope we’re building – I’m even more confident that we’re on the right course. 

 

Thank you.
