WASHINGTON, D.C. – U.S. Senator Barbara Mikulski (D-Md.), Chairwoman of the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice and Science (CJS), continues to reform government spending through strong oversight in her fiscal year 2011 CJS Appropriations bill which is included in the Omnibus Appropriations Act filed in the Senate today.
“Under my watch, overhead and overruns will not be overlooked and the taxpayer’s dollar will not be squandered,” Senator Mikulski said. “Spending excesses will not be tolerated. The American taxpayers will not finance lavish spending like $1.4 million for a conference and $4 per meatball for a catered dinner.”
The CJS provisions of the Omnibus insist on continuing to strengthen oversight by increasing funds for agency watchdogs, ending lavish banquets and requiring cuts in overhead.
The CJS Appropriations Subcommittee puts funds in the federal checkbook for more than 40 federal agencies and groups. These include science and innovation agencies like the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association (NOAA); and agencies that protect our nation and our communities, like the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the Department of Justice (DOJ).
Senator Mikulski instituted sweeping reforms in 2007 in response to a DOJ Inspector General report that showed the department spent nearly $7 million on elaborate conferences over a two-year period. At one event in July 2006, the department spent $4 per meatball on a dinner that cost more than $60,000. After reading the report, Senator Mikulski added language to the CJS appropriations bill that required IG audits of all conferences exceeding $20,000, prohibited using grant or contract money to pay for unrelated banquets and conferences, and required grant and contract recipients to certify they had no conflicts of interest.
In addition to maintaining those reforms, this year’s CJS provisions of the Omnibus:
Slash by 25 percent agencies’ reception and representation funds.
Ban excessive banquets and conferences.
Require all agencies to cut overhead by at least 10 percent – by reducing non-essential travel, supply, rent and utility costs.
Increase funding to Inspectors General (IGs), the taxpayers’ watchdogs at the agencies.
Require the IGs to conduct random audits of grant funding to find and stop waste and fraud.
Create an early warning system on cost overruns, requiring agencies to notify the committee when project costs grow by more than 10 percent. 
