U.S. Senator Barbara Boxer (D-CA) today lauded U.S. Department of Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood’s announcement that California transit systems will be awarded more than $27 million in new federal investments for cleaner, more efficient buses and other clean energy projects.

Senator Boxer said, “These investments will help make California’s transit systems cleaner and more efficient, while also creating jobs in communities across our state.”  

Secretary LaHood announced the new grants today through programs funded in the FY2010 Consolidated Appropriations Act and the FY2009 Omnibus Appropriations Act.  

The TIGGER (Transit Investments for Greenhouse Gas and Energy Reduction) II Program works with public transit agencies to implement new strategies for reducing their energy usage and greenhouse gas emissions. The Clean Fuels Grant Program assists public transportation systems in improving air quality and supporting new clean energy technologies. The Bus and Bus Related Equipment and Facilities Program provides capital assistance for new and replacement buses, related equipment, and facilities.  

The California grant recipients are:  

Project: Fast-Charge Electric Transit Bus Project (West Covina, CA)
Description: Foothill Transit will purchase fast-charge battery electric buses and equipment needed for their use in the transit system.
Grant Amount: $10,170,000 (TIGGER II) 

***  

Project: Fuel Cell Power System (Alameda/Contra Costa Counties, CA)
Description: The Alameda-Contra Costa Transit District will initiate a fuel cell energy system for on-site hydrogen production to power its transit system.
Grant Amount: $6,000,000 (TIGGER II)  

***  

Project: Hybrid Buses and Compressed Natural Gas Trolleys (Visalia, CA)
Description: The City of Visalia will purchase energy efficient buses powered through hybrid electric and compressed natural gas (CNG) engines.
Grant Amount: $3,187,200 

***  

Project: Compressed Natural Gas Fueling Facility (Los Angeles, CA)
Description: The City of Los Angeles Department of Transportation (LDOT) will use funds as it transitions its bus system to a compressed natural gas (CNG) system and to supplement a portion of the project to develop a CNG fueling station downtown.
Grant Amount: $3,001,810  

***  

Project: Electric Buses and Recharge Station (Fresno, CA)
Description: Fresno Area Express (FAX) will further development of its circulator program with the purchase two fast-charge battery, full-size composite body zero-emission electric buses, replacement batteries, and a recharging station.
Grant Amount: $1,896,600  

***  

Project: Compressed Natural Gas Buses (Anaheim, CA)
Description: Anaheim Transportation Network will update the Anaheim Resort Transit (ART) service with the purchase of compressed natural gas (CNG) buses to replace aging diesel buses.
Grant Amount: $1,700,500 

***

Project: Compressed Natural Gas Fueling Station Upgrades (San Diego, CA)
Description: The San Diego Metropolitan Transit System will replace the existing compressed natural gas (CNG) fuel compressors at the South Bay Maintenance Facility.
Grant Amount: $1,564,522  

***  

Project: Solar Canopies to Reduce Energy Consumption and Emissions (Ukiah, CA)
Description: The Mendocino Transit Authority will reduce emissions and energy usage by installing solar photovoltaic canopies to power a recharging station for proposed electric buses and to provide all-weather protection for its bus fleet.
Grant Amount: $470,000 (TIGGER II)
