WASHINGTON, D.C. – U.S. Senator Barbara A. Mikulski (D-Md.), Chairwoman of the Commerce, Justice, Science (CJS) Appropriations Subcommittee today announced she has continued her emphasis on funding to protect America from terrorism and violent crime. Senator Mikulski included $29.9 billion for the Department of Justice (DOJ) in the CJS Appropriations Bill – a $176 million increase above the President’s budget request.
“Law enforcement agencies work hard every day to keep our neighborhoods safe, even as they tackle new challenges such as rising mortgage fraud and new anti-terrorism investigations,” Chairwoman Mikulski said. “As their responsibilities grow, so does my support. I am committed to giving law enforcement the tools they need to clean up the streets, protect our families and fight crime.”
The bill continues making solid investments in many important programs to keep America safe from terrorism and to combat violent crime that faced by families and neighborhoods.

PROTECTING AMERICA FROM TERRORISM
The bill provides $8.2 billion for the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Chairwoman Mikulski has continually acknowledged the new counterterrorism and national security responsibilities placed on the FBI since the 9/11 terrorist attacks, and has shared her concern that the Bureau is being pulled in too many directions with too few resources.
“The FBI is our domestic security agency tasked with keeping us safe from violent crime, but with a growing international role, their resources could be spread too thin,” Chairwoman Mikulski said. “As the FBI adapts to new responsibilities, Congress needs to adapt with them.  We must give them the tools and technology they need to stay one step ahead of criminals and terrorists, while still protecting our local communities here at home.”
The bill also includes:
$6.8 billion for the Bureau of Prisons to keep guards and communities safe.
$2.1 billion for the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), which targets and dismantles criminal narcotics activities.
$1.2 billion for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF), to support partnerships with state and local law enforcement to fight gangs and prevent violence.
$1.2 billion for the U.S. Marshals Service, which includes a $10.2 million increase over the budget request to hire 50 new Deputy U.S. Marshals to address the increased workload associated with implementation of the Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act, which Chairwoman Mikulski co-sponsored.
COMMUNITY SECURITY
Chairwoman Mikulski has led the fight to restore the previous administration’s cutbacks on federal resources to fight and assist state and local communities in fighting violent crime. Pledging to stand up for hardworking cops on the beat, she provided $3.8 billion in funding to make sure police have every tool available to fight violent crime and drug trafficking, help victims of crime and keep our families and communities safe. 
“I have heard from state and local police around the country that the consequences of these funding cuts will be fewer cops on our streets fighting gangs, drugs, and child predators and fewer prosecutions of criminals,” Chairwoman Mikulski said. “We have an obligation to keep our communities safe from violent crime.”
Funding for state and local law enforcement includes:
$542 million for Community Oriented Policing Service (COPS) programs, including $363 million for COPS Hiring grants to hire or retain roughly 1,500 police officers.
$519 million for Byrne Justice Assistance Grants (JAG), state formula grants to assist local law enforcement.
$448.5 million to prevent violence against women.
$506 million for juvenile justice and delinquency prevention activities.
$340 million for grants administered by the National Institute of Justice and the Bureau of Justice Statistics.
