December 8, 2010 – Today, Nebraska’s Senator Ben Nelson said that the new bipartisan tax cut plan worked out by the President may have enough support to pass the U.S. Senate.
Asked on his weekly conference call with Nebraska reporters whether there were 60 votes for the President’s proposal, the number needed to override any filibuster, Nelson responded, “Well, I think there probably are.”
The senator also called the new bipartisan tax cut proposal, “a move in the right direction.”
“What I’ve heard sounds promising and I’m still looking to see all of the details to determine for certain that it will be a good deal for Nebraska and our country,” he said.
“I’m hoping it addresses the controversial IRS form 1099 provision in the health care bill that will impose a paperwork nightmare on our small businesses and agriculture. I’m also hoping that tax incentives for renewable fuels such as ethanol are part of a so-called tax extenders package.”
Nelson urged his colleagues in Congress to work with the Administration on passing a final bill before the end of the year when major Bush era tax cuts expire.
“Time and again, Nebraskans have told me that raising taxes during this recessionary period would be about the worst thing Washington could do. It would push our economy backward, hurting Nebraska job seekers, families and small businesses,” Nelson said.
“If Congress fails to act, Nebraskans’ taxes will go up a lot, and at the wrong time. The average Nebraska family’s tax bill will rise to $5,090. That’s an additional $1,629 in taxes they will pay.
The new tax cut proposal would extend expiring income tax cuts for all taxpayers for two years. It eases estate taxes set to rise next year. It cuts payroll taxes for every worker by 2 percent. It contains a package of business tax incentives to stimulate investment and job growth and a temporary extension of unemployment benefits for those who are out of work.
Nelson noted that he doesn’t support every element as drafted but the economic situation in the country, and the soon-to-expire tax cuts demand action even though it will increase the federal debt.
“This is a time when having any kind of a tax increase that hits the economy would create a shock to the economy that would have a greater negative impact on our recovery than temporarily adding to the debt,” the senator said. “If we can get predictability and stability in our tax system, getting companies to invest here is much more likely and they’ll be less likely to invest overseas. Wherever the investment occurs, you get economic growth and wherever you get economic growth you get job growth.”
