WASHINGTON, D.C.  – After a three-year controversial absence, the United Nations has put Florida’s Everglades National Park back on its list of the world’s most treasured or endangered sites. 
 
The decision to return the Everglades to the roster of imperiled sites culminates a multi-year push by U.S. Sen. Bill Nelson and others who have pressed the group that keeps the list, the U.N. Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.  Their effort began in 2007, after a high-level Bush administration official mysteriously and unilaterally persuaded the international body to drop the park.
 
There are a total of 910 sites worldwide on a list of places that either are considered unique or threatened.  The sites range from the Taj Mahal in India to the Acropolis in Greece to the Old City of Jerusalem – and, in the U.S., from the Statue of Liberty to the Grand Canyon National Park to Philadelphia’s Independence Hall.  Being on the list – and more specifically a subset of the most endangered sites, of which there are 34 - generally makes it easier to get preservation money both from the U.N. and local governments.
“The ‘Glades remains at risk and should’ve never been removed in the first place,” Nelson said today, lauding the U.N. body for its decision that came last Friday.  “There’s still a lot that needs to be done to restore the River of Grass.”    
 
Nelson was outspoken after a top Interior Department political appointee was exposed in The St. Petersburg Times for asking the U.N. to remove the Everglades.   Nelson blasted the previous administration for faltering on its pledge to restore the River of Grass and called for the firing of the official who made the decision.  That official later resigned.
 
Nelson also wrote to previous Interior Secretary Dirk Kempthorne and then Kempthorne’s replacement, current Interior Secretary Ken Salazar.  He urged both men to support efforts to get the ‘Glades back on the U.N. list.  In Salazar, he found an ally.
 
Nelson toured the Everglades with Salazar last year and pointed out how the park still is threatened by high levels of mercury, a decline in endangered species and a dramatic die-off of sea grass in Florida Bay.   At Nelson’s urging, Salazar agreed to initiate discussions with the U.N. about restoring the ‘Glades to the World Heritage list.
 
The World Heritage Committee of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization announced the decision at its annual meeting in Brasilia, Brazil.  The 10-day meeting concludes tomorrow.
