Mr. President, I support the continuing resolution. One of the many reasons is that the Navy’s urgent request for authority for the Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) program is included.

The original LCS acquisition plan in 2005 would have had the Navy buying both types of LCS vessels for some time, while the Navy evaluated the capabilities of each vessel. At some time in the future, the Navy would have had the option to down select to building one type of vessel. But in any case, the Navy would have been operating some number of each type of LCS vessel in the fleet, which means that the Navy would have been dealing with two shipyards, two supply chains, two training pipelines, etc. Last year, after the bids came in too high, the Navy decided upon a winner-take-all acquisition strategy to procure the fiscal year 2010 vessels under a fixed price contract, with fixed price options for two ships per year for the next four years. This revised strategy included obtaining the data rights for the winning ship design, and competing for a second source for the winning design, starting in fiscal year 2012. Again, the Navy made this course correction because the Navy leadership determined that the original acquisition strategy was unaffordable.

Earlier this year, the Navy released the solicitation under that revised strategy, and has been in discussion with the two contractor teams and evaluating those proposals since that time. The bids came in, the competition worked, and the prices were lower than the Navy had expected. Both teams have made offers that are much more attractive than had been expected, and both are priced well below the original, non-competitive offers.

Mr. President, the Navy has now requested that we approve a different LCS acquisition strategy, taking advantage of the low bids and keeping the industrial base strong. The Armed Services Committee held a hearing on the subject of the change in the Navy’s acquisition strategy. We heard testimony from the Navy that, after having reviewed the bids from the two contractor teams, they should change their LCS acquisition strategy.

The Navy testified that continuing the winner-take-all down select would save roughly $1.9 billion, compared with what had been budgeted for the LCS program in the Future-Years Defense Program, or FYDP;

The Navy further testified that revising the acquisition strategy to accept the offers from both LCS contractor teams, rather than down selecting to one design and starting a second source building the winning design, would save $2.9 billion, or $1 billion more than the program of record, and would allow the Navy to purchase an additional LCS vessel during the same period of the FYDP (20 ships rather than 19 ships);

The Navy also testified that additional operation and support costs for maintaining two separate designs in the fleet for their service life over 40-50 years, using net present value calculations, would be much less than the additional saving that could be achieved through buying both the ships during the FYDP period. (Approximately $250 million of additional operating and support costs vs. approximately $900 million in savings).

Those are the facts of the case as we heard from the Navy. Let me relay a few quotes from the Navy witnesses at the hearing to amplify on these points.

Secretary of the Navy Raymond E. Mabus, Jr., referring the authority to revise the acquisition strategy, said the following:

“This authority, which I emphasize, requires no additional funding, will enable us to purchase more high-quality ships for less money and get them into service in less time. It will help preserve jobs in our industrial shipbuilding base and will create new employment opportunities in an economic sector that is critical to our Nation's military and economic security.”

Admiral Gary Roughead, the Chief of Naval Operations, said:

“The dual award also allows us to reduce costs by further locking in a price for 20 ships, enabling us to acquire LCS at a significant savings to American taxpayers and permitting the use of shipbuilding funds for other shipbuilding programs.”

From a broad policy perspective, I believe that the Navy approach of a competitive, dual source alternative could help ensure maximum competition throughout the lifecycle of the program, meeting the spirit and intent of the Weapon Systems Acquisition Reform Act of 2009 (WSARA). Specifically, it calls for two shipbuilders in continuous competition to build the ships for the life of the program. The Navy plans to build a total of 55 of these ships, so that could take a number of years.

Some have raised concerns because the Navy has been unable to reveal the specific bid information from the two contractors. Unfortunately, the Navy has been prevented from sharing specific bid information because that would violate the competitive source selection process by revealing proprietary information about the two contactors’ bids. Because of these constraints, I do not know what is in the bids. But I take comfort from knowing that these bids are for fixed price contracts, and not for cost type contracts, where a contractor has little to lose from underbidding a contract.

As far as the capability of the two vessels, we heard from Admiral Roughead at the hearing that each of the two vessels would meet his requirements for the LCS program. I asked Admiral Roughead, “Do both of these vessels in their current configuration meet the Navy's requirements?” Admiral Roughead replied, “Yes, Senator, they do. Both ships do.”

Mr. President, some have raised the possibility that development of the mission packages could cause problems in the shipbuilding program and lead to unexpected cost growth, and thereby fail to achieve the extra savings the Navy is projecting. In some other shipbuilding programs that might be a concern, but I believe that the Navy’s fundamental architecture of the LCS program divorces changes in the mission package from changes that perturb the ship design and ship construction. In the past, when there were problems with developing the right combat capability on a ship, this almost inevitably caused problems in the construction program. In the case of the LCS, the combat capability largely resides in the mission packages that connect to either LCS vessel through defined interfaces. What that means is that changes inside the mission packages should not translate into changes during the ship construction schedule (i.e., they are interchangeable). And whatever is happening in the mission package development program would apply equally to either the down select strategy or the dual source strategy.

In terms of the proposal’s effects on the industrial base and on competition, I believe that there would be a net positive. The Navy would have the opportunity to compete throughout the life of the program, and any erosion in contractor performance could be corrected by competitive pressures. For the industrial base, there would be more stability in the shipbuilding program. Countless Navy witnesses have testified to the Armed Services Committee and the other defense committees that achieving stability in our shipbuilding programs is one of the best things we in the government can do to help the Navy support the shipbuilding industry.

The Navy’s proposal to change to a dual source selection strategy would promote that goal of stability, while effectively continuing competition throughout the program, and at the same time reducing acquisition costs and buying an additional ship over the FYDP.

Why don’t we just wait until sometime after the new Congress convenes to deliberate this changed acquisition strategy? Senator Jack Reed asked the Navy about this very issue at the hearing. He asked, “What is lost or what do you gain or lose by waiting?” Assistant Navy Secretary Sean Stackley answered that question as follow, “Workforce is leaving, hiring freezes are in effect, vendors are stressed in terms of their ability to keep faith with the proposals, the fixed price proposals that they have put in place. They will need to have to then go back with any further delay and reprice their proposals.”

What that means is, if we were to let the bids expire at the end of December, we would lose the full benefits of the competition and our savings will likely be reduced.

Mr. President, I support including the authority for the Navy to make this change in the continuing resolution before us.
