On April 8, 2009, President Obama and President Medvedev concluded negotiations, which had begun under President Bush, and signed the New START Treaty. This new Treaty is a key part of the reset of the U.S.-Russian relationship. Even though the Cold War ended 20 years ago, this relationship has been unclear; Russia is not an adversary but neither is it an ally. There have been divides and disagreements even though we share many common goals and interests. President Obama is rightly intent on moving the relationship in a more positive direction. Ratification of the New START Treaty is an important part of this process.

On May 13 of this year, President Obama submitted the New START Treaty to the Senate. In carrying out its responsibility the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, the Senate Armed Service Committee and the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence held a total of 20 hearings and 4 briefings. (7 hearings and 3 briefings were held by the Armed Services Committee.) Even before the new Treaty was submitted to the Senate, the Department of State provided the Senate National Security Working Group multiple briefings on the status of and issues discussed during negotiations.

It is now time for the Senate to provide its consent to ratification. As Admiral Mullen, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said about the START Treaty on December 12 “this is a national security issue of great significance and the sooner we get it done the better.” The Director of National Intelligence is also eager to get this Treaty finished and restore the insight into Russian nuclear forces that this Treaty will provide and that is so important for the intelligence community. Director Clapper said "the sooner, the better. From an intelligence perspective, we are better off with the Treaty than without it." Retired General Brent Scowcroft, the National Security Advisor for both Presidents Gerald Ford and George H.W. Bush, and a supporter of the Treaty, said “to play politics with what is the fundamental national interest is pretty scary stuff.”

Some have suggested that this new Treaty should not be taken up in this lame duck session of the 111th Congress. I couldn’t disagree more. Almost as soon as this session of Congress began, the President announced his intent to complete negotiations on the new strategic arms agreement to replace the START I treaty. Various Senate committees of this Congress and the Senate National Security Working Group of this Congress were briefed on numerous occasions by the negotiating team on the new Treaty. This Congress got the updates on the progress and the issues and this Congress provided guidance along the way. The committees of this Congress held 20 hearings and briefings on this new Treaty. This Congress hosted several all-member briefings including one such session with the Director of National Intelligence, James Clapper, to get his views on the importance of the Treaty. The next Congress will not have the benefit of all that work and insight. It is in fact the obligation and the duty of this Congress to take up this Treaty.

When President Obama submitted the START Treaty to the Senate for consideration he made 6 key points. 	The Treaty will enhance the national security of the United States.

	The Treaty mandates mutual reductions and limitations on the world’s two largest nuclear arsenals.

	The Treaty will promote transparency and predictability in the future strategic relationships of Russia and the United States.

	The Treaty will enable each party to the Treaty to verify that the other party is complying with its obligations through a regime of onsite inspections, notifications, comprehensive and continuing data exchanges, and provisions for unimpeded use of national technical means.

	The Treaty includes detailed procedures for elimination or conversion of Treaty accountable items, and

	The Treaty provides for the exchange of certain telemetric information on ballistic missile launches.

Equally important to this discussion is what the START Treaty does not cover.

	It does not limit US missile defense plans and programs.

	It does not limit US conventional prompt global strike programs.

	It does not provide authority within the Treaty to modify the terms and conditions of the Treaty without the advice and consent of the Senate.

	It does not constrain in any way the ability of the United States to modernize the nuclear weapons complex, modernize, maintain, or replace strategic delivery systems, or the ability to ensure that the stockpile of U.S. nuclear weapons remains safe, secure, and reliable.

It also does not cover nonstrategic nuclear weapons – often referred to as tactical nuclear weapons. The START Treaty covers, as have all previous nuclear arms reduction treaties, strategic offensive nuclear arms. Dealing with tactical nuclear weapons is certainly an area of arms control that needs to be addressed but has proved elusive to previous administrations, Democratic and Republican. It remains to be addressed.

The START III treaty was to have covered these weapons but when the START II treaty, which was signed by President George H.W. Bush and Russian President Boris Yeltsin in 1993, was not ratified, any hope of addressing tactical nuclear weapons in a START III treaty died along with the START II treaty. 17 years later President Obama is trying to get nuclear arms reductions back on track, by resuming discussions with Russia and signing the START treaty. Hopefully, entry into force of this START Treaty will allow the United States and Russia to discuss an agreement on tactical nuclear weapons. While getting an agreement to limit tactical nuclear weapons will be very difficult, without ratification of the New START Treaty, it will be impossible.

Because this Treaty does not require any significant reductions in either U.S. nuclear weapons or delivery systems, it is a fairly modest treaty.

The so-called Moscow Treaty, which was signed in 2002 by President George W. Bush and Russian President Boris Yeltsin, limited both Russia and the United States to a range of operationally deployed nuclear warheads by the year 2012. Under the Moscow Treaty, each side could have between 1700 and 2200 total operationally deployed nuclear weapons. Russia has already met this goal and the United States is very close. Under the START Treaty, each side will have no more than 1550 deployed nuclear weapons, a reduction of just 150 weapons below the Moscow Treaty. The START Treaty does not limit the number of non-deployed nuclear weapons, an issue of importance to the Commander of the United States Strategic Command, Gen. Kevin Chilton.

The limits in this Treaty were agreed to after careful analysis by U.S. military leadership, particularly Gen. Kevin Chilton, the Commander of the U.S. Strategic Command and the man responsible for these strategic systems.

At a hearing before the Armed Services Committee on July 20, 2010, Gen. Chilton stated that the force levels in the Treaty meet the current guidance for deterrence for the United States. That guidance was laid out by President George W. Bush: “The options we provided in this process focused on ensuring America’s ability to continue to deter potential adversaries, assure our allies, and sustain strategic stability for as long as nuclear weapons exist. This rigorous approach, rooted in deterrence strategy and assessment of potential adversary capabilities, supports both the agreed-upon limits in New START and recommendations in the Nuclear Posture Review (NPR).”

The strategic deployed forces allowed under the treaty will ensure the retention of the nuclear triad -- all three delivery legs of the triad, bombers, SLBMs and ICBMs. On that point Gen. Chilton was very clear saying “We will retain a triad of strategic nuclear delivery systems.”

Secretary of Defense Gates has also been very clear that the nuclear triad will be maintained. In an op-ed in May in the Wall Street Journal, Secretary Gates said the New START Treaty “preserves the U.S. nuclear arsenal as a vital pillar of our nation’s and our allies’ security posture. Under this treaty the U.S. will maintain our powerful nuclear triad….and we retain the ability to change our force mix as we see fit.”

Some have said that the United States will have to make significant reductions to reach the force levels under the Treaty and that the Russians will have to make no reductions. According to Gen. Chilton this argument is a distraction. At an Armed Services Committee hearing Gen. Chilton commented on the lower level of Russian forces and said “New START limits the number of Russian ballistic missile warheads that can target the United States, missiles that pose the most prompt threat to our forces and our nation. Regardless of whether Russia would have kept its missile force levels within those limits without a New START Treaty, upon ratification they would now be required to do so.”

While the START Treaty will also not require significant reductions in the number of U.S. strategic delivery systems, there will be some reductions, but not for 7 years. More importantly the START Treaty will provide certainty for both Russia and the United States as to the size of the deployed nuclear force of the other. This is particularly important to the United States because Russia is now below the proposed delivery system limits of the START Treaty, but has plans to build the number of strategic delivery systems. It is very much in the interest of the United States to have a cap on that build-up. An unrestrained build up would quickly bring back the ghosts and burdensome costs of the Cold War.

Under this new Treaty, Russia and the United States will each have a total of 800 deployed and non-deployed ICBM launchers, SLBM launchers, and heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments, and 700 deployed ICBMs, deployed SLBMs and deployed heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments. The Treaty does not limit non-deployed nuclear warheads, non-deployed ICBMs, non-deployed SLBMs, or heavy bombers that are NOT equipped for nuclear armaments. This is particularly important for the B-1B bomber fleet, as those airframes have not been in nuclear service for many years and will not be counted under the START Treaty when simple modifications are completed.

This START Treaty brings a practical approach to strategic systems and counts real delivery systems and real warheads. Over the years, the old START I Treaty had resulted in exaggerated nuclear force numbers. For instance, under the old START I Treaty, the 4 Ohio class submarines that have been converted to conventional use, were still counted as 96 deployed SLBMs and 768 deployed nuclear warheads. These exaggerated force structure levels have led to uncertainties for military planners and increased costs for the United States. Under this treaty they will not be counted.

One of the additional benefits of this START Treaty is that the Treaty provides a clear mechanism to remove systems from being counted under the Treaty. The ability to clearly and easily remove systems, such as heavy bombers from under the Treaty, is also of great importance to Gen. Chilton, the Commander of the United States Strategic Command.

For example the United States currently has 76 B-52 bombers and 18 B-2 bombers, a total of 94 nuclear capable bombers. Under the current plan for implementing the Treaty there will be up to 60 nuclear capable bombers. The remaining 34 can be converted to conventional only capability and will no longer count under the Treaty. They do not have to be destroyed. I think this fact is often misunderstood and there may be an impression that the 34 bombers will have to be destroyed under the treaty. That is not the case.

This past May, Secretary of Defense Gates wrote an op-ed in The Wall Street Journal. Drawing on his long history and involvement with strategic arms control agreements, which dates back to 1970, Secretary Gates said that the question is always the same for each treaty: “Is the United States better off with an agreement or without it?” With respect to the START Treaty Secretary Gates’ answer to the question is unequivocal: “The United States is far better off with this Treaty than without it.”

That is also the issue now before the Senate. Is the United States better off with this START Treaty? The 20 hearings and 4 briefings have clearly demonstrated that it is.

In that same op-ed, Secretary Gates emphasized the current state of affairs that has existed since the end of December 2009 when the START I treaty expired. Since that time, there has been no verification and inspection regime, no visibility into the Russian strategic programs, and no limits on delivery vehicles. As the Secretary said: “Since the expiration of the old START Treaty in December 2009, the U.S. has had none of these safeguards. The new treaty will put them back in place, strengthen many of them, and create a verification regime that will provide for greater transparency and predictability between our two countries, to include substantial visibility into the development of Russian nuclear forces.”

This rigorous inspection and verification regime, which when coupled with our national technical means, will allow this Treaty to be monitored and verified. Nevertheless there has been an argument made that Russia cheated on the START I Treaty and therefore we shouldn’t ratify the new Treaty. According to the Statement Department that is simply not the case.

In testimony before the Armed Services Committee in July, Assistant Secretary of State Rose Gottemoeller said, regarding the State Department’s 2010 Treaty Compliance Report, “I want to point out that Russia was in compliance with START’s central limits during the Treaty’s life span. Moreover, the majority of compliance issues raised under START were satisfactorily resolved. Most reflected differing interpretations on how to implement START’s complex inspection and verification regime.”

The old START I Treaty was a complicated and complex Treaty, many of the lessons learned from the inspections during the course of that Treaty have been incorporated into the new Treaty. There were issues on both sides. According to the 2010 Treaty Compliance Report, “The United States stated on several occasions to our Treaty partners that the United States was compliant with the Treaty; however as might be expected under a verification regime as complex as START, the United States and Russia developed a difference of views with regard to how the sides implemented certain Treaty requirements.” This is not the same as cheating.

Our senior military leaders believe the new Treaty can be monitored and verified and that if Russia did cheat there is high confidence that any cheating could be detected before such cheating rose to a level of military significance. Gen. Chilton said during testimony before the Armed Services Committee, “New START will reestablish a strategic nuclear arms control verification regime that provides access to Russian nuclear forces and a measure of predictability in Russian force deployments over the life of the treaty.” In a discussion on the ability to detect cheating I asked General Chilton “In other words, the verification provisions give you confidence that Russia cannot achieve a militarily significant advantage undetected?” General Chilton said: “Yes, that’s correct.”

Assistant Secretary of State Rose Gottemoeller, in her July testimony before the Armed Services Committee, made it clear that any cheating could be detected before it became militarily significant. She also believes that the United States is well positioned to deter cheating as well. In that regard she said “Deterrence of cheating is a key part of the assessment of verifiability, and is strongest when the probability of detecting significant violations is high, the benefits to cheating are low, and the potential costs are high. We assess that this is the case for Russia cheating under the New START Treaty.”

One of the areas on which we have had substantial discussion is missile defense. The U.S. missile defense program isn’t covered or limited by the New START Treaty. It (the missile defense program) has nevertheless become a major focus of the debate on the Treaty. Our missile defense programs and policies are based on developing and fielding the missile defense capabilities we need to meet the missile threats we face, not on any of these treaty matters. The New START Treaty does NOT limit the missile defense capabilities we need.

Secretary of Defense Gates, in testimony before the Armed Services Committee on June 17, said: “The Treaty will not constrain the United States from deploying the most effective missile defenses possible, nor impose additional costs or barriers on those defenses. I remain confident in the U.S. missile defense program, which has made considerable advancements, including the testing and development of the SM–3 missile, which we will deploy in Europe.”

Secretary of State Clinton, in testimony before the Armed Services Committee on June 17 said: “This Treaty does not constrain our missile defense efforts. I want to underscore this because I know there have been a lot of concerns about it and I anticipate a lot of questions.” During that same hearing Secretary Clinton went on to say “The Treaty’s preamble does include language acknowledging the relationship between strategic offensive and defensive forces, but that’s simply a statement of fact. It too does not in any way constrain our missile defense programs.”

In a July 20 hearing before the Armed Services Committee, Gen. Kevin Chilton, the Commander of the United States Strategic Command said: “As the combatant command(er) also responsible for synchronizing global missile defense plans, operations, and advocacy, I can say with confidence that this treaty does not constrain any current or future missile defense plans.”

Assistant Secretary of State, Rose Gottemoeller, the lead negotiator of the Treaty, in testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations hearing on June 10, said: “The Treaty does not constrain our current or planned missile defense and, in fact, contains no meaningful restrictions on missile defenses of any kind.” Later, on July 29, in testimony before the Armed Services Committee, Assistant Secretary Gottemoeller said “There were no—and I repeat—no secret deals made in connection with the New START Treaty, not on missile defense nor on any other issue.”

As the Ballistic Missile Defense Review report made clear, the Administration is pursuing a variety of systems and capabilities to defend the homeland and different regions of the world against missile threats from nations such as North Korea and Iran. A good example of that is the Phased Adaptive Approach to missile defense in Europe. The Secretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended it unanimously. It is strongly supported by our NATO allies. The November 20, NATO Lisbon Summit Declaration says that “the United States European Phased Adaptive Approach is welcomed as a valuable national contribution to the NATO missile defence architecture.”

During the NATO Lisbon Summit NATO announced its own decision to build a missile defense system to protect European populations and territory against missile attack, consistent with the Phased Adaptive Approach. The Phased Adaptive Approach is designed to provide effective missile defense capabilities in a timely manner against existing or emerging Iranian missile threats. Those are the missile threats faced by our military personnel, allies, and partners in Europe.

As the Secretary of Defense and numerous other officials have made clear, the Treaty does not limit our missile defense plans or programs. The Armed Services Committee also knows that, and our authorization bill stated that fact. Section 221(b) (8) of the Ike Skelton National Defense Authorization Bill for Fiscal Year 2011 that we passed this morning in the Senate states, “there are no constraints contained in the New START Treaty on the development or deployment of effective missile defenses, including all phases of the Phased Adaptive Approach to missile defense in Europe and further enhancements to the Ground-based Midcourse Defense system, as well as future missile defenses.”

To be very clear there is one provision in the Treaty that prohibits each side from using ICBM silos or SLBM launchers for missile defense interceptors, and vice versa. But using these silos and launchers are not in our missile defense plan and should not be in our plan because it would be very much against our interest to use strategic missile interceptor silos for ballistic defense purposes. It would be more expensive than building new silos, the strategic missile silos aren’t in the right locations to defend against missiles from North Korea, and most importantly, it would be destabilizing to launch ballistic missile interceptors from ICBM silos or SLBM launchers.

Lieutenant General O’Reilly, the Director of the Missile Defense Agency has made clear, we don’t want, need, or plan to use such silos for missile defense purposes. In a June 16 hearing before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Lieutenant General O’Reily made it very clear saying “replacing ICBMs with ground-based interceptors or adapting the submarine–launched ballistic missiles to be an interceptor would actually be a setback—a major setback—to the development of our missile defenses.”

That one limitation has no impact on our plans for missile defense, plans that are more effective and less expensive than converting ICBM or SLBM silos to missile defense use.

There is one other area of the many that have been discussed in connection with the START Treaty that I would like to raise, and that is modernization of the nuclear weapons complex and maintaining the ability to certify annually that our stockpile remains safe, secure and reliable.

Shortly before Congress instituted a moratorium on nuclear weapons testing in the early 1990s, the United States established a stockpile stewardship program to design and build advanced scientific, experimental, and computational capabilities to enable the annual certification process for the nuclear weapons. This program has been very successful. Beginning in 2005, however, support for the program started to wane and the budgets for nuclear activities started to go down. Without enough money the weapons complex was forced to have layoffs at the nuclear weapons laboratories and the production facilities, to defer maintenance on many important buildings and facilities, to delay key acquisitions, and to delay design and construction of the last 2 major new production facilities. President Obama, in his fiscal year 2011 budget request and in the plans for the future years, has turned this situation around by providing $4.1 billion more dollars over the next five years than previously planned. This level of funding is unprecedented since the end of the Cold War.

President Obama laid out his funding plan for the nuclear enterprise in the November Section 1251 report, a report that would provide an additional $1.2 billion over 2 years, a 15% increase and a total of $41.6 billion for fiscal years 2012-2016 for the National Nuclear Security Administration.

With these amounts has the administration committed enough to modernization and sustainment of the complex and the life extension programs for the nuclear stockpile? The directors of the 3 nuclear weapons laboratories all say yes. In a joint December 1, 2010, letter to Senators Kerry and Lugar, the 3 directors of the nuclear weapons laboratories said that the funding level proposed in the section 1251 report “ would enable the laboratories to execute our requirements for ensuring a safe, secure, reliable, and effective stockpile under the Stockpile Stewardship and Management Plan.”

The Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration, under both President George W. Bush and President Obama, Tom D’Agostino, said, in testimony before the Armed Services Committee in July, “Our plans for investment in and modernization of the Nuclear Security Enterprise—the collection of NNSA laboratories, production sites, and experimental facilities that support our stockpile stewardship program, our nuclear nonproliferation agenda, our Naval nuclear propulsion programs, and a host of other nuclear security missions—are essential irrespective of whether or not New START is ratified.”

The Senate Foreign Relations Committee took the right approach on this issue in its resolution of ratification by not making entry into force contingent on a certain funding level, but by including a sense of the Senate that the United States is committed to a robust stockpile stewardship program.

The list of both Republican and Democratic supporters of this Treaty is broad and strongly bipartisan, including, 8 former Secretaries of State, ( Madeleine Albright, Warren Christopher, Colin Powell, Condoleezza Rice, James Baker, Lawrence Eagleburger, George Schultz, Henry Kissinger) 4 former Secretaries of Defense, (Harold Brown, Frank Carlucci, Bill Cohen, Bill Perry, and Jim Schlesinger) 7 former commanders of the United States Strategic Command, President George H.W. Bush, President Clinton and a long list of national security experts.

Our NATO allies support this Treaty and have urged us to ratify it without delay. NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rassmussen said at the NATO summit in Lisbon in November: “A ratification of the START Treaty will contribute strongly to an improvement of the overall security environment in the Euro-Atlantic area, and all members of the NATO-Russia Council share the view that an early ratification of the START Treaty would be to the benefit of security in the Euro-Atlantic area. I’d also have to say that it is a matter of concern that a delayed ratification of the START Treaty will be damaging to the overall security environment in Europe. So we strongly urge both parties to ratify the START Treaty as early as possible.”

I believe that the Senate should consent to ratification of the New START Treaty and that ratification of this treaty is in the national security interest of the United States. Ratification of the New START Treaty will provide predictability, confidence, transparency and stability in the United States-Russian relationship. The New START Treaty will make us safer today, and leave a safer world for our children and grandchildren. The Senate should ratify the New START Treaty now.
