WASHINGTON, D.C. - Today the United States Senate voted to convict U.S. District Court Judge G. Thomas Porteous from the Eastern District of Louisiana on four articles of impeachment. U.S. Senator Claire McCaskill served as the chairman of the Senate Impeachment Trial Committee, the body that oversaw the evidence gathering phase of the trial on behalf of the full Senate. McCaskill today spoke on the Senate floor about the historic nature of this impeachment trial and the important role impeachment plays in the checks and balances in the U.S. government.

"It has been an incredible honor to participate in this process that was devised by very wise people very long ago... The Constitution is working the way it was designed to work when it comes to the checks and balances of the three branches of government," McCaskill said on the Senate floor. She continued "I am very proud to be a senator today. There are days when that's not as easy to say...But I am very proud of the United States Senate and how we conducted ourselves during this very important and grave proceeding. I think the responsibility was handled just as the founders would have wanted us to handle it."

After the House of Representatives in March approved the articles of impeachment against Judge Porteous, the Senate was tasked with trying the case and deciding whether or not to convict him of the four articles. The Senate Impeachment Trial Committee, led by McCaskill and Senator Orrin Hatch (R-UT), was responsible for receiving evidence and hearing testimony on behalf of the entire Senate. After hearing almost 40 hours of testimony in September, the committee presented their summary of the evidence to the full Senate yesterday. Senators heard closing arguments from Judge Porteous' lawyers and the House Impeachment Managers yesterday, deliberated last night, and voted on the articles today.

Judge Porteous is only the 12th impeached federal judge to be tried in the Senate and the 8th to be convicted. Following today's conviction, Judge Porteous was immediately removed from office.

For more information on the impeachment trial click here. The full text of Senator McCaskill's floor speech is below.

Unofficial Transcript
12/8/10
McCaskill Floor Speech

Mr. President, our Constitution is a glorious thing. It is in fact the envy of the world. And one of the most effective and elegant elements of the foundation of our government is the provisions that provide for the checks and balances of our three branches of government. It has been an incredible honor to participate in this process that was devised by very wise people very long ago that actually provides the American people the reassurance that the constitution is working the way it was designed to work when it comes to the checks and balances of the three branches of government.

The responsibilities of the modern Congress, both House and Senate, are extensive. I don't need to spend much time, Mr. President, talking about how busy we are right now. But the fact that we set aside everything that we were doing and came together and sat as a Senate and listened to the arguments and deliberated extensively about this impeachment should be reassuring to every American. I think the results are interesting in that it reflects that each senator made an individual decision about the articles of impeachment. There was some unanimity on some of the counts but on others it was Republicans and Democrats, conservatives, progressives on both sides of the questions, and I think that shows the extent to which everyone made an independent judgment and took their responsibilities very seriously.

I want to take just a few minutes now to thank some people that really are unsung heroes here. Obviously I thank the distinguished vice-chairman, the senator from Utah, for his support, his experience, and his wisdom in discharging the committee's duties. He was essential to this process and a great rock for me to lean on and at many turns during this process. I also want to thank the ten other members of the Impeachment Trial Committee for their devotion and diligence and commitment to this important work.

And then I would like to take just a couple of minutes to talk about the staff. I want to begin with Derron Parks who is seated with me here on the floor of the Senate. Derron walked into my office and was hired to be a legislative assistant for health care, in the middle of some pretty difficult times on health care. And then I said to him, oh, by the way, could you run an impeachment of a federal judge also? So as a brand-new member of my staff, he took on incredible responsibility. And all of the thanks I've gotten really belong to him. Because he worked hard, he worked smart, he was a great leader, and did a remarkable job of marshaling a bunch of senators, a bunch of staffs, a bunch of witnesses, a bunch of evidence, a bunch of legal research and did it in a way that I think the Senate can be very proud.

I also want to thank Tom Jipping, who is Senator Hatch's staff person who helped with this, as the Deputy Staff Director for the Impeachment Committee, who also put in an incredible amount of work and gave a very valuable counsel and Justin Kim, counsel. Justin was very important because whenever there was a disagreement about what was the right road to take in terms of historical precedent, rule of law, decisions on motions, he was always a good sounding board. There was always more than one smart lawyer in the room so that the ideas could be bounced back and forth and somehow we could come up with the right answer based on the law, the Constitution, and historical precedent.

Rebecca Seidel, who was also very valuable to the committee, another counsel who was essential in this process. Erin Johnson, the deputy counsel and chief clerk who did frankly some of the most difficult work and that was making sure we had a quorum during the trial, which was hard, as you can imagine, Mr. President. Keeping senators in one seat for an extended period of time? That's tough. And she managed to make sure that we always had a quorum that the law demanded.

And Lake Dishman, another member of the staff that did a wonderful job. Susan Navarro Smelcer, from Congressional Research Service (CRS) did wonderful work for us in terms of allowing us some help on the research of the historical precedents and decisions that guide our way.

Morgan Frankel, who was here on the floor for the conclusion of this impeachment matter. He is the Senate Legal Counsel, and like Senator Hatch, this wasn't his first time to deal with impeachment matters. So he was a wealth of information and a wonderful help to us. And Pat Mack Brian, she also did great work. Grant Vinik and Tom Caballero were also from the Senate legal staff. And then all the committee members had the staff people that helped on this. I will not put all of their names on the record now. But they will be made part of my entire statement. I will have more extensive comments on the impeachment proceedings, which I will insert in the record.

I just want to conclude by saying, I'm very proud to be a senator today. There are days that that's not as easy to say. There are times that this place is pretty dysfunctional. But I am very proud of the United States Senate and how we conducted ourselves during this very important and grave proceeding. I think the responsibility was handled just as the founders would have wanted us to handle it and I think we all should be proud of that. I ask unanimous consent, Mr. President, that the full text of my statement appear in the record at this point.
