WASHINGTON—Mid Michigan will now benefit from direct flights to Washington D.C. thanks to the successful leadership of Senator Debbie Stabenow and a strong community effort led by the Capital Region Airport Authority, Michigan State University, and the Lansing Regional Chamber of Commerce. Today, she announced that the U.S. Department of Transportation has approved the application of Sun Country Airlines for an available slot to fly direct between Lansing’s Capital Region International Airport and Washington D.C.’s Ronald Reagan National Airport. This direct flight will amplify the work of Port Lansing to make Mid-Michigan an international hub for businesses and promote economic development in the region.
 
“This new direct flight serviced by Sun Country Airlines will provide a major economic boost to Mid-Michigan and create jobs,” said U.S. Senator Debbie Stabenow. “I have had multiple conversations with Transportation Secretary LaHood concerning the importance of this route to businesses in order for them to have better direct access from our state capitol to our nation’s capital. This announcement will support Port Lansing’s international facilities at the airport which help businesses increase exports of Michigan and U.S. products and services.”
 
“This is the best economic development news we could wish for before Christmas,” said Robert Selig, Executive Director of Capital Region Airport Authority. “We owe all of our thanks to Senator Stabenow for making this happen.”
 
“This enhanced access to Washington D.C. will be of great benefit to Michigan State University, our faculty and students, because of our many federal projects such as FRIB (Facility for Rare Isotope Beams), and it will be a huge boost to Mid-Michigan bringing more business into our community,” said MSU President Lou Anna Simon.
 
The decision by the U.S. Department of Transportation comes after it initiated a proceeding in September 2010 to reallocate two slots at Ronald Reagan National Airport.
