  Last September, this subcommittee met to discuss a critical, but often overshadowed, component of financial regulatory reform—the international efforts to harmonize and implement financial regulations.

As I said then, “We live in an interconnected global economy, and as we’ve seen, that means interconnected global problems.  Vulnerabilities and gaps in financial markets abroad, can impact us here at home.  The reverse is also true.  Any reform or rules we enact here, at some level should be matched or harmonized abroad to ensure capital does not gravitate to the lowest common denominator.”

Immediately following the crisis, there was global consensus that regulatory changes were needed to strengthen the foundation of our markets and the global economy and that those changes should be harmonized to prevent regulatory arbitrage. 

At our hearing last September, our leading representatives and experts on international economic and financial affairs outlined their priorities and the work underway to follow through on the commitments made by global leaders at the G-20.

They described their roles on the Financial Stability Board, and other international standard setting bodies and how effective those institutions can and will be during this difficult process.  We discussed capital requirements, derivatives, accounting standards and other policy issues.

Nine months have passed and there are important updates in the area of financial reform.  Most notably, Congress passed the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.  When President Obama signs the bill into law tomorrow, we will become the first country to adopt comprehensive financial regulatory reform that meets the principles outlined at the G-20 meetings. 

While the bill rightly focuses on reforming our domestic system, it also includes an international provision that requires the Board of Governors and the Administrative Office of the United States Courts to conduct a study on international coordination relating to the resolution of systemic financial companies under the Bankruptcy Code and applicable foreign law.

Continued oversight by this committee of our progress towards international harmonization will remain important.  In fact, Senator Merkley and I filed an amendment that would make these hearings mandatory.  Though our amendment wasn’t included in the final bill, I’m pleased that you all were still able to join us today.  And as long as we can count on you to continue making the trip up to Capitol Hill on a regular basis, we should be just fine.

Over the last nine months we have also seen significant and disruptive international developments.  The European debt crisis demonstrated, once again, the interconnectedness of our global financial system.  The Basel Committee released a draft proposal on capital and liquidity requirements in December and met again last week to continue its work on that critical issue.  The EU has been working on legislative proposals on hedge fund and OTC derivatives regulatory reform.  And last month, Britain announced that it will abolish its main financial regulator, the FSA, and consolidate its authority into the Bank of England. 

The G-20 met again last month in Toronto, and it appears that much of the discussion focused on the global economic recovery and the debate over fiscal austerity versus stimulus spending.  I am hopeful, however, that our witnesses today will be able to provide some insight on the discussions on financial regulatory reform that took place at the Summit.
    
We meet today to continue our dialogue on these important issues to ensure that we do not lose any momentum or get bogged down in the details as the financial crisis becomes a more distant memory. We have asked the witnesses to provide updates on their key priorities for international alignment and to explore what the consequences may be to the U.S. and our financial institutions if international coordination is not achieved in those areas. 

As President Obama said last year, we need to foster an environment that encourages a “global race to the top.”  Now that the legislative process is complete, and we begin the process of implementing the new reforms, we must ensure that other countries follow our leadership in lifting global financial standards. 

I look forward to the witnesses’ testimony and our discussion to come.
