WASHINGTON, D.C. – U.S. Senator Frank R. Lautenberg (D-NJ) today introduced legislation to bring greater transparency to the student loan process for students, their parents, and other loan co-signers. The bill is named after Christopher Bryski, a New Jersey college student who suffered a traumatic brain injury during his third year at Rutgers and passed away after spending two years in a coma. Christopher’s family struggled to determine how they were going to pay back his loans and make legal, financial and medical decisions on his behalf. 

“Students and their families make huge financial commitments as they seek higher education. Christopher’s Law will ensure that lenders provide full disclosure to young adults and their families who sign onto loans that will often take decades to pay off,” Lautenberg said. “While the Bryski family struggled to deal with the loss of their son, they were burdened by additional hardships brought on by creditors and lenders. They have shared their story so that other families have the guidance they need to make legal and financial decisions when tragedy strikes.”

The “Christopher Bryski Student Loan Protection Act” would ensure that parents and other co-signers are fully informed of their obligations to repay student loans, including in the event of the student’s death. While federal loans are typically discharged upon a borrower’s death, private loans often are not. The bill would require all private education lenders to clearly define the obligations of the cosigner and provide information about durable power of attorney, which grants legal authority for decision-making to someone else in the event an individual is incapacitated. It would also require colleges to provide information about durable power of attorney and loan discharge rules to students and cosigners of a loan. 

“We hope Christopher’s Law will help families throughout the country by holding lending institutions accountable for their actions. Christopher’s Law makes it mandatory for lending institutions to inform families,” said Ryan Bryski, Christopher’s brother, on behalf of the Bryski Family. “It’s only fair that families know up front what their obligations are, and what to expect during catastrophic situations. This kind of information should not be buried in the fine print. We do not want other families to endure the pain and confusion we had to. We are extremely grateful for the constant hard work and support of Senator Lautenberg and his staff.”

On June 17, 2004, 23-year-old Christopher Bryski of Marlton was fatally injured in a recreational accident. He spent two years in a vegetative state before passing away in 2006. During that time, his family struggled to make financial decisions on his behalf and were surprised to learn of their financial obligations. Upon his death, the U.S. Department of Education discharged Christopher’s student loans. However, Christopher’s father remained liable for the private student loans and continues to make payments on his behalf. The Bryski family has advocated for improved transparency during the student loan process and the importance of signing a durable power of attorney. 

The bill has been endorsed by the Brain Injury Association of America, the National Association of State Head Injury Administrators, and the Brain Injury Association of New Jersey. Companion legislation, introduced by Rep. John Adler (D-NJ-3), was approved in the U.S. House of Representatives on September 28, 2010.
