WASHINGTON—U.S. Senator Jeff Sessions (R-AL), a senior member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, today offered an amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act that would provide the Navy authorization to purchase twenty Littoral Combat Ships. 

The Navy recently proposed that both contractors, Austal USA in Mobile, Alabama and Marinette Marine in Marinette, Wisconsin, build ten ships each over a five-year period. Congress had previously authorized the Navy to purchase 19 ships over the same period, however, due to the rigorous competition, the Navy determined there would $1 billion in savings if Congress grants authorization for the new strategy. 

“The Littoral Combat Ship is a critical component of the Navy’s fleet,” Sessions said. “The vigorous competition and price reductions will allow the Navy the opportunity to purchase twenty ships at substantial cost-savings, and, during a time of high unemployment, this new strategy will create thousands of new jobs. I applaud Secretary Mabus and the Navy for their efforts in negotiating with the contractors to save money and to acquire more ships sooner. Congress needs to ensure our men and women in uniform receive the best quality ship at the lowest cost to the taxpayer. It’s important that we pass the legislation necessary to accomplish this.” 

Austal USA in Mobile will build ten of the ships, pending congressional approval. This would more than double their sizeable current workforce from 1,800 to 4,000 employees over the next two to three years. The revised acquisition strategy will allow the Navy to obtain more ships in a shorter period of time, putting it on track to more quickly reach its goal of a 313-ship Navy. Additionally, the Navy will purchase all 20 ships at 2010 prices and not subject themselves to the risk of purchasing ten ships now and the other nine at inflated future prices. 

The Senate failed to pass the Motion to Proceed to NDAA in September by a vote of 56 to 43. The Senate is expected to vote on the Motion to Reconsider NDAA later today.
