I would first like to thank Secretary Conaton for her kind remarks and applaud the Air Force for holding this very important event. I noticed that the Undersecretary and I have something in common.  Before jumping over the Potomac to that funny five sided building Ms. Conaton gained some valuable experience working in the halls of Congress, more specifically for the House Armed Services Committee. I trust that Ms. Conaton is utilizing some of those well honed people skills in dealing with the bureaucracy both on the Virginia and DC sides of the river. Additionally, I would like to take this moment and recognize all of the service men and women in attendance here today.  We truly owe both you and your families a debt of gratitude and I would like to take this opportunity to recognize your service and say thank you.

For decades both Republican and Democrat administrations alike have recognized that this nation needs to reduce its dependence on Middle Eastern oil. Former President Jimmy Carter – not someone with whom I typically agree – recognized the urgency of this back in 1979 when he remarked:
 
“The generation long growth in our dependence on foreign oil will be stopped dead in its tracks right now and then reversed as we move through the 1980’s, for I am setting the further goal of cutting our dependence on foreign oil by one-half by the end of the next decade.”
 
Unfortunately, we have not made much progress on President Carter’s goal. As we are all aware, hostile regimes in countries such as Iran and Venezuela use oil profits to subsidize terrorist proxies, threaten the U.S. and our allies, and deny their own people basic democratic rights.

While our good neighbor to the north provides the majority of our imported oil, we are still very much dependent upon oil from nations with interests that are often divergent from our own.
 
It wasn’t that long ago that our nation was faced with $140 per barrel oil. When oil gets expensive, it has very real effects on American households, business and our nation’s economy. At $140 per barrel oil, we are sending $700 billion abroad every year.  This is the amount of the Wall Street bailout.
 
Oil prices have declined substantially from the record highs during the summer of 2008 but the urgency of putting into place a common-sense energy independence policy has not lessened. We have moved too slowly toward a comprehensive energy strategy that leads us to energy independence. I certainly recognize that it will take time to wean ourselves from our addiction to Middle Eastern oil.  But we must start now.
 
I believe an energy independence policy means that we should harness the power of American-made sources of energy.  And we have a lot of them. Our natural gas reserves are some of the best in world.  Natural gas is cheap, clean, and American-made.  It’s good for the economy, environment, and jobs. Coal will continue to play a major role when it comes to electricity generation.  And the good news is that the coal-fired plants of today bear little resemblance to the coal plants of the past.
 
But what I am here to talk about today is renewable energy.  And here in Nevada we have a tremendous and unmatched opportunity to be the leader in green energy solutions which will over time reduce our dependence on Middle Eastern oil. Our geography and topography have made us a unique location for investment in renewable energy projects, especially solar energy.
It is for these reasons that I have worked over the years to support the development of renewable energy in Nevada. 
 
In working with Maria Cantwell of Washington State, we were able to extend vital renewable energy tax credits to encourage the development of renewable energy projects.   These tax credits have driven renewable energy development and created jobs across the nation. I have also worked with Senator Cantwell to extend the Department of Treasury’s Grant in Lieu of Tax Credit program which allows developers to utilize renewable energy tax credits despite the collapse in tax equity markets. And it is my hope that we will be able to extend this program for another two years.
 
I have worked with Senator Reid to improve the permitting process for renewable energy projects on public lands. Some of Nevada’s best solar resources are located on federal land and we need to be certain that bureaucratic red tape is not slowing development.
 
In addition, Senator Reid and I have worked to ensure that the state and counties receive their fair share of revenues from renewable energy projects. These funds are important to the counties and we need to make sure that Nevadans see the benefit of our state’s incredible renewable energy resources. 
 
I have supported the creation of a national renewable energy standard and have introduced legislation with Senator Feingold to improve the standard and encourage energy efficiency. 
 
On the transmission side, I have worked with Senator Reid improve our state’s renewable energy transmission infrastructure by encouraging transmission in rural areas.  Because many of our nation’s renewable energy resources are located in remote areas far from access to the electrical grid, additional transmission lines would be required to move this power to states lacking renewable energy resources. The “Clean Transmission for Rural Communities Act” would expand existing bond programs to ensure that rural areas can invest in infrastructure to access the grid.  
 
I would like to turn my attention to the military’s role in energy development.  Our military has a vital role to play in renewable energy development and I have been glad to see Nevada’s military installations taking a leading role in this endeavor.  We have to look no further than the photovoltaic field at Nellis, which at the time of its construction was the largest PV array in North America.  This array generates over 25 million kilowatt hours of electricity every year and supplies more that 25 percent of the base’s power.  Well done Nellis.
 
Up in the north at Fallon and Hawthorne we continue to explore using geothermal energy to power those installations.  As you can see we have a very diverse state when it comes to geothermal resources too.
 
Further, the military also needs to understand that when a developer comes to them with an idea they can’t provide that developer with a simple “yes” or “no.”  They need to work with the developers and localities.  So, if the answer is “no” that no should be followed with a “but what about over here” or “what about if we tried this.” To the military’s credit it has been much better about this in recent years. 
 
Further, I cannot help but notice we might one day need to conduct operations against a nation or nations with renewable energy infrastructures.  In my opinion, Nevada presents the military with an opportunity to train in these environments.  Perhaps the military could use windfarms in Nevada as a way to evade radar detection. This will of course require close coordination between the military and developers, as the military knows which portions of its ranges are most conducive to these types of training scenarios.  
 
We here in Nevada have another valuable resource.  This resource is finite and extremely valuable.  It is meant as a check on regimes such as Iran, Venezuela and North Korea that I mentioned earlier.  Once it is lost it is extremely difficult if not impossible to replace.  I am referring to our military ranges, and especially the Nevada Test and Training Range or NTTR. There is a careful balance that must be struck in exploiting our renewable energy potential and preparing for war.  Make no mistake that is what the fine men and women are doing on our ranges.  They are preparing to lay their lives on the line in defense of this great nation.  And when it merits, this vital national role must always take precedence over energy development.

During his first address to Congress, George Washington stated: “To be prepared for war is one of the most effective means for preserving peace.”  I believe this to be just as true today as when he spoke those words during this nation’s infancy.  That is why I am so proud to have some of the crown jewels of the DOD infrastructure located right here in Nevada. 
 
We are blessed to have Nellis and Creech in the south and Fallon Naval Air Station and Hawthorne Army Depot to our north. I’d also like to recognize the fine work being done by the Nevada National Guard under the leadership of Brigadier General Bill Burks.  Since September 11th, the National Guard and Reserves have been especially strained and we need to recognize their sacrifice as well. The mission these installations undertake on a daily basis is one of the main reasons why the U.S. military is the preeminent fighting force on the world stage today and will be for years to come. At these installations, fine men and women of every military service train to win the wars in which we currently find ourselves and prepare to deter and defeat future aggressors. 

During my time in the Senate I had the privilege of serving as both the Chairman and Ranking Member of the SASC Subcommittee on Readiness and Management Support.  This subcommittee had direct oversight of military installations, including ranges, and dealt with issues affecting them – including BRAC. During my tenure in this position, I learned a lot about our ranges.  I learned that operating space is a valuable commodity and one that is necessary for our pilots to receive proper training.  They need this space to properly simulate threats, acquire targets, adapt to various environments, and most importantly complete the mission and return home safely. 
 
The spaces we have for this training in Nevada, especially the Nevada Test and Training Range, are unique.  The training environment they afford our servicemen and women, as well as our allies, is not available anywhere else in the world.  Once that environment is lost it is almost impossible to recover.
 
Through this conference I hope you walk away with one overarching theme. Renewable energy development must be done as a partnership with our national security interests, not at the expense of them.  The life and safety of our service members is and must continue to remain priority number one.
 
I don’t have to remind you that we are living in a perilous time. The recent Quadrennial Defense Review released this past February rightly recognized that not only are we fighting simultaneously in Afghanistan and Iraq but that we also need to be ready to face a myriad of threats….some asymmetric, some more conventional in nature. 
 
In the context of this conference, I’d like to read a particular section of the QDR that hit home for me.
 
“U.S. Air Forces in future conflicts will encounter integrated air defenses of far greater sophistication and lethality than those fielded by our adversaries of the 1990’s.  Proliferation of modern surface-to-air missile systems by Russia and others will pose growing challenges for U.S. military operations worldwide.” 
 
One of the reasons that we were so effective during Operation Desert Storm was of our ability to dominate in the air. We were able to dominate in the air because our pilots had state of the art equipment and received the best training in the world.  Much of that training occurred right here in Nevada up at Fallon and on the Nevada Test and Training Range. 
 
One thing not a lot of people remember about Operation Desert Storm is that despite this overwhelming success we still lost dozens of fixed wing aircraft in the conflict.  The point I am trying to make is that the training taking place here in Nevada and at the NTTR has a direct impact on how many of our warfighters return home from conflict to their families.
 
The world is a very dangerous place.  In March North Korea sank a South Korean patrol boat.  Iran makes threats on an almost daily basis and appears to be getting closer and closer to acquiring the S-300 missile system.  This system will make it dramatically more difficult for our pilots to complete their missions and return home safely.   These are irrational rogue regimes with sophisticated and integrated air defenses that we must be prepared to deal with. 
 
We do not know what our next conflict will be or who it will be against. What we do know is that we must be prepared and that starts here in Nevada out on the NTTR.  Especially, on the NTTR. The NTTR is the largest test and training range in the Air Force Infrastructure.  If you are a pilot this is where you come to become the best.  It is truly a national treasure and must be preserved.  
 
 It should come as no surprise to anybody in the audience that the country has fallen on hard economic times.  This is especially true here in Nevada.  U.S. employment lies at 9.5% and in Nevada it is a staggering 14.3%. One of the factors that has helped prevent this number from growing even higher, especially in southern Nevada, is that Nellis and Creech Air Forces Bases pump $5 billion annually into the local economy and are responsible for in excess of 13,000 jobs. We cannot and should not take these numbers for granted.  These jobs and figures are reliant upon the health of Nellis and Creech, and the health of Nellis and Creech are reliant upon the health of NTTR.  It would be very difficult if not impossible for one to exist without the other. 

Ensuring the health of our Nevada military installations is vital to Nevada’s economy as is promoting renewable energy. That is why I am thankful that the Air Force has hosted this event, and that is why I am thankful that our friends in the renewable energy industry have chosen to participate.

Thank you and I appreciate your having me here today.
