“Today the Senate will vote with my firm support to move forward on a bill that cuts taxes on the middle class, helps the millions of Americans looking for work, and takes action to boost our still sputtering economy.
 
“I regret that this package also contains an extension of the upper income and estate tax cuts that I oppose.  I will never understand why those on the other side of the political aisle are so determined to give tax cuts to the wealthiest Americans that they don’t need and the country can ill-afford.  But a better, more focused middle class tax cut was voted down last week and at this point we need to move forward. 
 
“Today’s tax package will make a real difference in the lives of the deserving and hardworking people I came here to represent, and I’m not going to walk away from them, now or ever.
 
“Without this bill, the average American family would face a $1,765 tax increase next year—a financial burden that is unthinkable in a struggling economy. And without this bill, 2 million unemployed Americans and more than 10,000 unemployed West Virginians would be left out in the cold as they continue to look for work.

“The great majority of this package is worth fighting for: it extends the middle class tax cuts, provides payroll tax relief to every working West Virginian and makes child care and college more affordable for middle class families.

“Compromise is never easy, and I will continue to make the case against tax cuts for the very wealthy when they expire in two years.  But right now thousands of working families in West Virginia are struggling in this economy and we have to put them first.”
 
Background for West Virginia:
 
Without this legislation, about 10,000 West Virginians could lose their unemployment benefits this month, and more people will over time.
The package continues improvements in the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) which helps 50,000 West Virginia children in families of three or more children.
The package continues improvements in the Child Tax Credit (CTC) which is claimed by over 135,000 West Virginia families, with an average credit of $1,271.
The package extends the American Opportunity Tax Credit (AOTC) to offset up to $2500 for the cost of tuition expenses including books and supplies.  In 2009, 29,000 West Virginia claimed this credit for an average tax break of $1,759.
It would fix the Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT) for two years which will protect 52,260 West Virginia families from higher taxes.
The legislation also provides every worker an increase in take-home pay with a Payroll Tax Holiday that reduces payroll taxes for employees by two percent on income up to $106,800.  West Virginia workers earning $30,000 will take home an additional $600; and workers earning $50,000 will take home an additional $1000.
