Calling it a critical step “to ease congestion and improve safety at one of America’s busiest rail intersections,” U.S. Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison (R-Texas) today announced that Fort Worth’s Tower 55 rail project has been awarded a $34 million competitive grant by the Department of Transportation.

The project is being undertaken by TXDOT in partnership with BNSF Railway, Union Pacific Railroad, Amtrak, the City of Forth Worth, the North Central Texas Council of Governments, and the Fort Worth Transit Authority.

“The Tower 55 rail project has been one of my highest priorities in the Senate because of the tremendous safety and traffic challenges facing Fort Worth’s vital rail intersection. With this transportation grant, Fort Worth will finally see completion of this critical infrastructure safety project. This will also help create good local jobs as the final stages of the Tower are being completed. The Tower 55 initiative epitomizes a successful public-private partnership. I appreciate Representative Kay Granger’s continuing support for this project, and I was pleased to work with Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood to help bring it to completion,” said Sen. Hutchison.

In August, Senator Hutchison urged Secretary LaHood to prioritize the Tower 55 project, emphasizing the importance of the project to the Fort Worth community, as well as to passenger travel and international trade. Full text of the letter available 
here.

The Tower 55 Multi-modal Rail Improvement Project will lay new track, install sidings, and construct pedestrian crossings and overpass bridges to ease congestion and improve safety. It will create 700 jobs in the Fort Worth area.

The project will greatly enhance rail and motorist transportation flows through and around the Tower 55 intersection. Additionally, the project will strengthen community safety by granting emergency vehicles greater access to local neighborhoods. The construction of new walking underpasses will improve pedestrian mobility and safety in surrounding communities, including the seven schools in close proximity to the intersection.

Tower 55 is a critically important freight and passenger rail gateway located along a key transportation trade corridor connecting the United States, Mexico, and Canada. It has also become one of the most congested rail chokepoints in the nation’s supply chain. Eleven major freight and passenger rail lines from across the country converge at Tower 55 into a single, four-way intersection. More than 100 passenger and freight trains must travel through the intersection on peak days.
