 Senator Kent Conrad made the following statement today regarding the results of the 2010 Congressional elections.

"I am deeply disappointed with the results of last night's election. North Dakota has lost an exceptional leader with the loss of  Earl Pomeroy. 
 
"For the last 18 years, Earl represented the people of North Dakota with honor and distinction, earning a reputation as one of the hardest-working members of Congress.  Whether it was his extraordinary work on the Farm Bill, his championing of flood relief and protection, his successful efforts to save our Air Force bases, or his important support for education issues, Earl always fought tirelessly for the people of North Dakota. 
 
"The many victories for our state accomplished through Earl's hard work and commitment have left an indelible mark on every corner of North Dakota. The people of North Dakota will miss his dedication and leadership, and the benefits Earl's seniority has provided.  I know I join North Dakotans across this state in thanking Earl Pomeroy for his outstanding service to our state.
 
"For close to two decades, I have been fortunate to be able to go to work every day with my two best friends — Byron and Earl. It has been a profound honor to be a member of Team North Dakota. I am so proud of what we have been able to accomplish for our state. I have no doubt that North Dakota's current prosperity is partly the result of the tireless efforts of this team.
 
"We must now move forward and continue to work for North Dakota.
 
"I want to congratulate John Hoeven on his victory in last night's election.  Lucy and I look forward to welcoming John to the United States Senate.  John and Mikey should know they can count on us for any assistance necessary as they prepare for his new role in the U.S. Senate.
 
"Our nation faces tremendous challenges that will require consensus and cooperation. North Dakotans have always been able to count on their Congressional delegation to form a united front and do what is best for our state. I intend to work with John Hoeven and Rick Berg for a prosperous future for all North Dakotans.”
