U.S. Senator Kit Bond today visited the St. Louis region to highlight local companies whose work is critical to our national security.  Bond visited with Earth City defense workers at Clean Earth Technologies LLC., where the Senator announced that $3 million for the company’s life-saving technology cleared an important hurdle in Congress.  The Senator also toured the Pea Ridge mine, south of Sullivan, Missouri, where he met with Wings Enterprises officials on the strategic importance of developing a domestic rare earth minerals capacity.
 
“Investments like these in our defense industry are vital to our national security, Missouri’s economy and foremost, our warfighters’ safety,” said Bond about Clean Earth Technologies. “The work you do serves our men and women in uniform and keeps our military second to none. Companies like this are cornerstones of our economic quality of life in Missouri.”
 
After touring Clean Earth Technologies, Bond praised the local manufacturing company for their contributions to our nation’s defense.  The company has been on the forefront of developing ways to enhance our military’s surveillance, intelligence, and reconnaissance gathering capabilities.  Bond, a senior member of the Senate Appropriations Defense Subcommittee, secured $3 million in federal funds to continue this critical work in the defense spending bill, which passed the Senate Appropriations Committee in September.  Before being signed into law, the bill must first pass the full House and Senate.  Bond secured an additional $2 million in last year’s defense spending bill.
 
The funds Bond secured for Clean Earth Technologies will be used for the Combat Airborne Multi-Mission Payload – or CAMP – project.  This project allows a single sensor to do the job of several existing systems, saving millions of dollars of valuable intelligence and reconnaissance resources.  Specifically, CAMP will assist with route clearance and convoy support, enemy detection, and battle damage assessment.  In addition, CAMP will help save troops’ lives by aiding in the detection of Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDS) – some of the biggest killers of American servicemen and women in both Afghanistan and Iraq.
 
Later in the day, the Senator toured the Pea Ridge mine, south of Sullivan, Missouri and was briefed by Wings Enterprises, the local company working to turn the mine into a rare earth minerals producer.  Rare Earth minerals are a group of 17 naturally-occurring, metallic elements used in small amounts in everything from high-powered magnets to batteries to electronic circuits.  While technology has advanced, so has the demand for these essential elements.  Unfortunately, China has a near-monopoly on the mining of rare earth.  According to the latest geological survey, China has 37 percent of the world’s estimated reserves, but control’s 97 percent of production.  The Senator has grown increasingly concerned about America’s dependence on China to supply all of our rare earth needs and has emphasized the need to develop a domestic capacity. 
 
Following the tour of the mine, Bond heard from Wings Enterprises on why Pea Ridge is ideally suited for the location of a new domestic refinery, how a new refinery in Missouri would bring economic benefits to the region and help counter China’s monopoly on rare earth minerals.  Bond also praised Wings Enterprises and the Thorium Energy Alliance for leading an effort to establish a National Rare Earth Cooperative.  Due to the massive capital needed to start up and build the refining capability, it makes sense to have a consortium working together and leveraging investment.  Bond pointed out that this model has worked before – like when American farmers overcame similar challenges and banded together to overcome capital costs related to machinery and logistical infrastructure.
 
“Just as we cannot afford to be dependent on foreign oil cartels for our nation’s energy, counting on any one foreign competitor to supply all of America’s rare earth needs crucial to our technological innovations is too risky a bet,” said Bond.  “It is critical that we have a domestic source of rare earth minerals, a necessary component for a number of technologies that Americans are increasingly dependent on – from cell phones to MRI machines to smart bombs to hybrid care engines.”
