Mr. President, the financial reform bill before us is being sold to the American people as holding Wall Street accountable for the economic crisis that has hurt every American family and business in every community across the nation.  We are told this bill will end “too big to fail” and prevent the need for future bailouts.
 
Unfortunately, just as the stimulus bill was supposed to reduce unemployment, and the health-care bill was supposed to lower health care costs and reduce the deficit, this bill, too, will do the opposite of what is advertised.
 
It will not prevent future bailouts;
It will create another huge new federal bureaucracy, and;
Instead of punishing Wall Street, it will punish Main Street and the families who suffered from – not caused – the financial meltdown.
 
This bill was meant to reign in Wall Street yet is supported by Goldman Sachs and Citigroup and opposed by small businesses.  I think that tells you all you need to know about this bill.
 
That’s why I strongly oppose cloture on this bill.  Yes, we have made some improvements to this bill.  I am grateful to my colleague Senator Dodd for working across the aisle with me to remove an onerous provision that would have unintentionally killed small business startups.  
 
But despite some of the progress we made, the provisions most harmful to taxpayers, families, and small businesses still remain.
 
As a matter of fact, new provisions have been “air-dropped” into this conference report that are so problematic, neither chamber agreed to include them in either version. 
 
If we are truly committed to enacting real bipartisan reform, then the majority would not allow items that were never debated or voted on to be included in this bill.
 
I hope my Democratic colleagues will stand up for the principles they have so loudly talked about and say no to this backroom practice.
 
I would like to talk about some of the most egregious provisions in this bill.
 
First – it is unbelievable and unacceptable that so many of my colleagues want to turn a blind eye to the Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs) which contributed to the financial meltdown by buying high risk loans banks made to people who could not afford them. 
 
Everyone here knows what I’m talking about.  Despite this bill’s 2300-plus pages, it completely ignores the 900-pound gorilla in the room, the need to reform Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, or the “toxic twins” as I not so fondly refer to them. 
 
The irresponsible actions by Fannie and Freddie turned the American dream into the American nightmare for too many families who have either had their homes foreclosed or who are hanging on by a thread.
 
The irresponsible actions by Fannie and Freddie devastated entire neighborhoods and communities as property values diminished.
 
To add insult to injury, after Fannie and Freddie went belly up, it was the very Americans who suffered from their irresponsible actions that were left footing the bill.
 
As if that wasn’t bad enough, unless we act now to reform these Toxic Twins, over the next 10 years, Fannie and Freddie will cost American taxpayers at least an additional $389 billion dollars.
  
What is in this bill to address that problem?  Nothing. 
 
Next, this bill lumps in the good guys with the bad guys and treats them all the same – particularly when it comes to derivatives.
 
Folks who are trying to manage risk and control costs are treated the same as folks who are speculating in the market, making shady bets with money they don’t have, making insurance bets on property they don’t own.
 
Now, I’ve heard from folks who say -- what exactly does that mean to you and me?
 
That means, for instance, utility companies may not be able to lock in steady rates for their customers, leaving them instead at the whim of the volatile market.
 
They will have to pay billions to Wall Street or Chicago to “clear” their normal long-term contracts with energy suppliers through the clearing houses run by big financial firms. 
 
That means you and I, and folks in every community across the country, could pay much higher costs every time we flip on the light switch or turn on the air conditioner.
 
That means family farms may not be able to get long term financing, forcing many to quit farming and preventing many from beginning to farm. 
 
Quite frankly, I’m stunned that any Senator, in good conscience, would vote for a bill that will increase costs for every American, especially at a time when working families are struggling to make ends meet.
 
One thing is certain, this bill will enlarge government.   Today’s Wall Street Journal editorial opines that “Dodd-Frank, with its 2,300 pages, will unleash the biggest wave of new federal financial rulemaking in three generations. 
 
Whatever else this will do, it will not make lending cheaper or credit more readily available.”  They go on to state that one law firm has estimated that the new law “will require no fewer than 243 new formal rule-makings by 11 different agencies.” 
 
What will be the effect?  More lawyers, more bureaucracy, more taxpayer money, and more lawsuits.
 
I cannot vote for a bill that creates a massive, new super bureaucracy with unprecedented authority to impose government mandates and micromanage any entity that extends credit.
 
We are not just talking about the Goldman Sachs and AIGs of the world.  No, in the real world we are talking about your community bank, your small retailers, and even your dentist.
 
And let’s not be naïve – any of the new costs as a result of the new mandates and regulations will be passed on to consumers – the very people this bill is supposed to protect.
 
Under the new misnamed Consumer Financial Protection Bureau – or CFPB --  the decisions on allocating credit will no longer be based on the safety and soundness requirement for healthy banks. 
 
Instead, by empowering this new super bureaucracy with unprecedented power, decisions on credit will be driven by  the Administration’s political will and agenda.  Politics will then  decide how to allocate credit while operating outside the framework of safety and soundness.
 
This giant bill also contains a provision creating a new Office of Financial Research.  This office is given the authority to access personal financial information of any citizen in the U.S. 
 
I don’t know about you, but I would prefer not to have a new bureaucracy rifling through my personal account information in an era of electronic communication, where fraud and identity theft run rampant.
 
Ordinary Americans who did not cause the financial meltdown should not be punished and placed at risk because the government wishes to create this new, unnecessary office.
 
I could continue to list provision after provision, pointing out expansions of government and ill-intended policies that will create more uncertainty while failing to hit the objective of regulatory reform, however this chamber does not have hours for my speech alone.
 
Much like the healthcare bill recently signed into law, I fear that small businesses will soon learn of many more unintended consequences which have yet to be seen – even the bill’s sponsor admits that the bill’s long reach will not  be fully known until it is in place. 
 
To sum it up, if the goal here is to enact real reform that ensures that we never ever have another financial crisis like the one we had 18 months ago, the bill falls woefully short of that goal. 
 
This bill is light on reform and heavy on overreach and unintended consequences. 
 
Overall, the Democrat’s bill is too large, too costly for consumers, and would kill job creation at a time when working Americans need to be left to do what they do best – succeed.
 
There is no doubt we need to protect every day Americans from ever again falling victim to Wall Street-Gone-Wild.
 
But what we do not want, and why this debate is so important, is to punish Americans for a crisis they did not  cause.
 
Unless we scrap this failed version and start over, the Democrats’ bill will do just that and the costs will be paid by Main Street.
 
I thank the Chair and yield the floor.
