WASHINGTON -- U.S. Sen. Mark R. Warner’s (D-VA) bipartisan legislation to make government work better by requiring every federal agency to set clear performance goals that can be accurately measured and publicly reported to Congress and taxpayers was approved by a key Senate committee today. The Senate Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee passed The Government Performance and Results Modernization Act of 2010 this morning.

The legislation establishes a clear framework to identify overlapping federal programs, and requires more focused efforts to identify potential taxpayer savings.  This proposal, the first significant update of The Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) of 1993, is co-sponsored by Sens. Tom Carper (D-DE), Daniel Akaka (D-HI), Joseph Lieberman (I-CT), Susan Collins (R-ME) and George Voinovich (R-OH).

"It's time to move beyond the debate over 'big' versus 'smaller' government to focus instead on real action we can take now to provide a much more efficient and effective government," Senator Warner said.  "This proposal will require federal agencies to set clear goals, measure their results and publicly report on their findings. Our citizens - our customers -- deserve to have regular reports about how their government is performing.”

The Government Performance and Results Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRMA) requires each agency to designate a Chief Operating Officer and a Performance Improvement Officer, with the primary responsibility for pursuing cost-savings through the improved analysis and coordination of duplicative programs. These officials also would be held responsible for considering potential taxpayer savings through better coordination of administrative functions common to every agency, such as purchasing and human resources. 

The Warner legislation requires federal agencies to post performance data on a single public website, on a quarterly rather than a yearly schedule. It also sets an ambitious first-year goal of an overall 10-percent reduction in the cumulative number of little-used or outdated written reports mandated by previous Administrations and Congresses.  

"The Government Performance and Results Modernization Act of 2010 will encourage federal agencies to put away the stacks of reports that no one reads and actually start to think how we can improve the effectiveness, efficiency and transparency of our government," said Senator Tom Carper.  "While the strength of our democracy rests on the ability of our government to effectively serve the people, we in Congress have a responsibility to be judicious stewards of the resources taxpayers invest in America, and ensure those resources are managed honestly, transparently and effectively.  I thank my colleagues for sponsoring the legislation, particularly Senator Warner for his tremendous work in this area.”  

Senator Warner’s legislation broadens and accelerates current Office of Management and Budget reform efforts and builds upon H.R. 2142, which was endorsed by the House of Representatives in mid-June.   

"The Government Performance and Results Act established a firm foundation for government performance and accountability. Implementation of the law over the past 17 years, however, has proven that additional upgrades are necessary to help improve more effective oversight of taxpayer dollars," said Senator Susan Collins. "The changes being considered will bolster both the spirit and the strength of the law by requiring government-wide strategic planning, transparency, and measurable goals. The ultimate winner here is the American taxpayer."

Senator Warner currently serves as chairman of the bipartisan U.S. Senate Budget Committee’s Task Force on Government Performance. From 2002 to 2006, he served as Governor of Virginia during its worst economic recession in 20 years, and he worked in a bipartisan way to make Virginia state government more effective, efficient and affordable. When Governor Warner left office in January 2006, Virginia was nationally recognized as the country’s “best-managed state” and the “best state for business.”
