WASHINGTON, D.C. – A group of 14 Senators today asked the White House and the bipartisan leadership of the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives to move forward to address the urgent fiscal challenges facing our nation regardless of the outcome of today’s scheduled vote by members of the bipartisan National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform. Their joint letter was publicly released this morning as Commission members prepared to vote on bipartisan recommendations to reduce our nation’s long-term debt by an estimated $4 trillion over the coming decade.   

“The strong bipartisan support [the Commission’s] recommendations have already received demonstrates we can, and must, come together to solve this impending fiscal crisis,” the Senators say in their joint letter. “Every day that we fail to act, the choices become more difficult… There is no easy way out, and Washington must lead the way.”

Senators signing the letter included Mark R. Warner (D-VA), Evan Bayh (D-IN), Mark Begich (D-AK), Michael Bennet (D-CO), Tom Carper (D-DE), Dianne Feinstein (D-CA), Kay Hagan (D-NC), Amy Klobuchar (D-MN), Mary Landrieu (D-LA), Joe Lieberman (I-CT), Claire McCaskill (D-MO), Jeanne Shaheen (D-NH), Jon Tester (D-MT) and Mark Udall (D-CO).

“While there are plenty of provisions in the Commission plan we do not support, our nation would be far better off with a comprehensive deficit reduction plan than without one,” the letter states. “The [Commission’s] report shows that we can stabilize our debt over the long term, while fostering our economic recovery now, improving our country’s global competitiveness, and maintaining our commitment to protect the most vulnerable in our society.”

“Prompt action is needed to bring the country’s deficit into balance and stabilize our debt over the long term,” the joint letter concludes. “Regardless of whether the Commission’s report receives the support of at least 14 of its 18 members, we urge legislative action to address these problems.  

“The American people deserve—and demand—that we pull together to avert this looming crisis.” 

The complete text of the letter appears below.
