WASHINGTON – U.S. Senators Mark Pryor and Blanche Lincoln along with U.S. Representative Mike Ross (AR-04) today announced that the Piney Fire Protection Association in Garland County will receive a $144,000 grant from the Department of Homeland Security’s Assistance to Firefighters Grants (AFG) program. The funds will be used to enhance operations and safety.

“This funding will give firefighters in Garland County the support they need to protect families and keep our communities safe,” Lincoln said. “Firefighters work tirelessly and risk their lives to protect our communities, and we owe it to them to make sure they have the resources they need to do their jobs.”

"Local firefighters put their lives on the line to protect their communities," Pryor said. "This investment will help the Piney Fire Protection Association operate efficiently and keep its firefighters safe."

“Our communities rely on local fire fighters and first responders to help protect our homes and keep our families safe,” said Ross. “I am pleased to help announce this federal investment in the Piney Fire Protection Association because we must help ensure these brave individuals have the support and resources they need to quickly answer the needs of the families and businesses in and around Garland County.”

The Assistance to Firefighters Grant (AFG) Program of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is an important component of the larger, coordinated effort to strengthen the nation’s overall level of preparedness and ability to respond to fire and related hazards.

AFG provides fire departments and EMS organizations the tools and resources necessary to protect the health and safety of the public and emergency response personnel. In Fiscal Year 2010, DHS Assistance to Firefighters Grant Program will award approximately $390 million directly to fire departments and EMS organizations to enhance their response capabilities and to more effectively protect the health and safety of the public and emergency response personnel with respect to fire and all other hazards.
