WASHINGTON – Sen. Mike Johanns (R-Neb.) today voted to ratify the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) in the Senate after several amendments were approved that addressed his concerns. The treaty was ratified by a vote of 71-26. A two-thirds majority of those voting was required for ratification.

"I have examined this treaty very carefully and after numerous amendments and debate, I believe New START is in the best interests of the United States,” said Johanns. “Our national security and international relationships will be better off with this agreement than without it. Though I was opposed to limiting debate as we did, since that time my concerns have been adequately addressed. In my view, this treaty takes us in the right direction.”

After yesterday’s cloture vote, two amendments passed that addressed important concerns. An amendment (S. AMDT. 4864) offered by Sen. Jon Kyl (R-Ariz.) requires the U.S. President to certify that strategic nuclear weapon delivery systems (bombers, intercontinental ballistic missiles and submarine-launched ballistic missiles) will be modernized and an amendment (S. AMDT. 4908) offered by Sen. George LeMieux (R-Fl.) addressed the disparity between Russian and U.S. tactical nuclear weapons and requires negotiations between Russia and the U.S. to occur within one year of ratification of the Treaty.

Johanns co-sponsored two additional amendments that were adopted today. The first amendment (S. AMDT. 4892) was offered by Senator Kyl to require an annual report be compiled regarding the modernization of the United States' nuclear weapons stockpile and clarify that the United States can withdraw from the Treaty if the modernization plan is not adequately funded.

Johanns also co-sponsored an amendment (S. AMDT. 4904) offered by Sens. John McCain (R-Ariz.), Joseph Lieberman (I-Conn.) and Bob Corker(R-Tenn.) that added a condition to the Resolution of Ratification requiring the U.S. President to certify to the Senate and to Russia that the continued development and deployment of U.S. missile defense systems will not be threatened by the Treaty. It also ensures that the continued improvement of U.S. missile defense systems does not constitute a basis for questioning the effectiveness and viability of the Treaty or for Russia to withdraw from the Treaty.  Additionally, the amendment states that the preamble linkage between offensive and defensive weapons imposes no legal obligations on the United States; therefore not restricting the continued development of our missile defense systems.
