Washington, D.C. – U.S. Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell delivered the following remarks on the Senate floor Thursday in Tribute to the Junior Senator from Kentucky, Jim Bunning: 

“Few people can say they’ve had the same range of experiences — and successes — in life as Senator Jim Bunning. In fact, there isn’t even another major leaguer who can say he struck out Ted Williams three times in one game. And Jim accomplished that notable feat in just his second year in the Majors. Thirty nine years after that, he’d become the only member of the Baseball Hall of Fame to serve in the U.S. Congress.

“For the past 12 years, I’ve been honored to work alongside this remarkable American in the Senate. We followed different paths in life, but we share a deep love for Kentucky, and its people. It has been my honor over the years to have worked closely with Jim to advance our common goals.

“So today, I’d like to say a few words about my good friend, as we honor his remarkable life and service.

“Jim was born and raised in Southgate, Kentucky, and it wouldn’t surprise anybody to learn that he excelled in school and sports growing up. He played baseball as a teenager at St. Xavier High School in Cincinnati, but it was for his skills as a basketball player that would earn him an athletic scholarship to Xavier University.

“Baseball interrupted his college education, but at his father’s insistence, Jim would return to Xavier and earn a degree in economics that has served him well in Congress over the years. He entered the majors in 1955. And over the course of a storied 17-year career he would play for the Detroit Tigers, the Philadelphia Phillies, the Pittsburgh Pirates, and the Los Angeles Dodgers. Jim is a pretty imposing force at committee hearings — just ask Chairman Bernanke — but he was a dominating presence on the mound long before that. At 6’4”, he was a hard-throwing sidearmer who would tumble off the mound with every pitch he threw. By the end of his career, Jim could boast that he was the first major league pitcher to win 100 games, rack up 1,000 strikeouts and throw no-hitters in both leagues. He finished with an impressive 224-184 record, 2,855 strikeouts, and a 3.27 era — the career stats that would earn him a spot in the Baseball Hall of Fame. 

“Jim’s two greatest pitching achievements were his no hitter in 1958 and the perfect game he threw on Father’s Day, 1964, a feat that has only been accomplished 20 times in baseball history. Another little-known feat was Jim’s so-called `immaculate inning’ in 1959, when he struck out three Red Sox on nine pitches, a feat that’s only been achieved 43 other times in baseball history. Around here we joke that Jim likes to throw the high hard ones. But he developed the skill early. Over a four-year period with the Phillies, Jim hit more opposing batters with pitches than any other pitcher in the league. In fact, over a 17-year career, he plunked 160 batters, or nearly 10 batters a year—making him the 13th most dangerous pitcher of all time, ahead of such other well-known headhunters as Roger Clemens, Nolan Ryan, and Don Drysdale.

“Jim’s never been afraid of a little chin music. And he brought that same competitive mentality to his life in public service.

“After baseball, public service seemed like a logical choice. It was Jim’s turn to give back. Give back is exactly what he did, and when Jim walks out of this chamber for the last time at the end of this session, he’ll be able to say with justifiable pride that he’s given 33 years of his life to public service and Kentucky.

“Over those three decades, Jim has served in all levels of government, from the Ft. Thomas City Council to the Kentucky State Senate, to both chambers in this building — 12 years in the House and 12 in the Senate. He has dedicated his life to serving the people of Kentucky. And Kentuckians are grateful for his service. In the House, he made a name for himself, among other things, by working tirelessly to strengthen and protect Social Security as Chairman of the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Social Security. 

“And then, in 1998, he decided to make a run at the U.S. Senate seat which at the time was held by Wendell Ford. It turned out to be a pretty close election, but once he arrived in the Senate, Jim set out to become one of the hardest-working and most influential members of this chamber.

“He’s been a staunch social and fiscal conservative, and a budget hawk who for years has sounded the alarm on the kind of concerns about spending and debt that drove so many Americans to the polls this month. Jim spoke for many Americans when he said in a recent statement that, being a grandfather to many he worries that future generations will be saddled by the poor decisions that are being made today.

`For the first time in my life,’ he said, `I question if my grandchildren will have the same opportunities that I had.’

“One particular issue that has been close to Jim’s heart is the issue of adoption. In 2001, Jim introduced legislation to make adopting more affordable to American families. And in 2007, he introduced legislation to make those tax incentives permanent.

“And, of course, if there was ever a controversial issue regarding the national pastime on Capitol Hill, Jim was right at the forefront, including the 2005 hearings related to steroid use in baseball. In one memorable exchange from that hearing, Jim offered the following testimony, from his own experience as a player.

`Mr. Chairman,’ he said, `maybe I'm old-fashioned, [but] I remember players didn't get better as they got older. We all got worse. When I played with Hank Aaron and Willie Mays and Ted Williams, they didn't put on 40 pounds to bulk up in their careers and they didn't hit more homers in their late 30's than they did in their late 20's.’

“It was just this kind of straightforward, common-sense approach to the issues that has won Jim a legion of admirers not only on the baseball diamond, but off of it. And on this issue in particular, Jim’s passion and personal perspective helped shed light not only on the dangers of steroid use at the professional level, but on the growing steroid epidemic among young athletes at all levels.

“Despite his high profile, Jim never forgot about the issues that mattered most to his constituents back home. He’s been a staunch supporter of clean coal technologies as an effective, efficient way to use coal, improve our environment, and bring jobs to Kentucky. Another issue that was extremely important to all Kentuckians was the failed clean up of radioactive contamination that was found in the drinking water wells of residences near the Department of Energy’s uranium enrichment plant in Paducah, Kentucky in 1988. In 2004, Jim harshly criticized the DOE’s cleanup efforts, as well as called several hearings on Capitol Hill to draw attention to DOE’s failure to compensate many workers that had been stricken with radiation-related diseases.

“In every issue he’s taken on, whether national, statewide or local, Jim has been a man of principle from start to finish. He’s stayed true to himself. And in a truly remarkable life, he’s got a lot to be proud of. But if you were to ask Jim to list his greatest achievement, I don’t think he’d say it was his election to the U.S. Senate or his induction to the Hall of Fame. They’d both come in a distant second and third to the day he married his high school sweetheart, Mary. Jim and Mary still live in the Northern Kentucky town where he grew up. They’ve been married for nearly 60 years. Together, they’ve raised nine children. And they enjoy nothing more than spending time with the next generation of Bunnings — which last time I checked included 35 grandchildren and five great-grandchildren. Jim will tell you there’s no secret to his success. He’s happy to give all the credit to Mary. As he put it in his Hall of Fame induction speech, she’s his rock.

“Today we honor and pay tribute to our friend and colleague for more than three decades of public service. Jim will be remembered for his two Hall of Fame-worthy careers, for his example of principled leadership, and for his devotion to God, country, and family. On behalf of myself and the entire Senate family, Jim, we thank you for your service, and we wish you the best in the next chapter of your life.”
