WASHINGTON, D.C. – U.S. Senator Olympia J. Snowe (R-Maine) announced that the Continuing Resolution, introduced in the Senate today, includes critical funding for the Low Income Housing Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP), ensuring that Maine receives its full funding allocation this year.  LIHEAP is a federal block grant program that provides states with annual funding to operate home energy assistance programs for seniors and low-income households. Although a short-term Continuing Resolution would fund LIHEAP at last year’s level of $5.1 billion, the uncertainty of final Fiscal Year 2011 (FY11) funding may force the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to allocate funding at a lower level in the event that Congress ultimately provides lower LIHEAP funding in the final FY11 appropriations bill. For instance, although the previous CR funded LIHEAP at $5.1 billion, on October 28th HHS only released $2.71 billion in LIHEAP funding, resulting in a cut of roughly 40 percent from last year’s levels for the coldest months of the year. 

Senator Snowe, in cooperation with Senator Jack Reed (D- Rhode Island) led an effort on Friday to modify language in the Continuing Resolution that would ensure HHS would allocate the funds provided last year.  The language, which has been included in the Continuing Resolution that will be considered by the Senate early this week, will result in a total of roughly $53 million in formula funds for Maine this year.

“With heating oil prices 12 percent higher than last year and Maine’s unemployment rate at 7.3 percent, the LIHEAP program will be the only means for thousands of Mainers to stay warm during the upcoming winter months. Heating is not a luxury, it is a necessity, and LIHEAP, a program that I have supported my entire Congressional career, often serves as the only means to guarantee home heating in tough economic times. Given the economic condition of our country and the state of Maine, I believe that we should maintain the current level of funding for this critical program and I am very encouraged that this language will result in stable support for the program,” said Senator Snowe.

Due to elevated prices of energy and high unemployment levels, for the last two years Senators Snowe and Reed have led the effort to secure $5.1 billion annually for LIHEAP to help more than 8.8 million low-income households nationwide, and 63,000 in Maine alone. Currently, with the economy still sputtering, LIHEAP applications are expected to jump again this year as more than 10 million American households are expected to need help with winter energy bills. Even though LIHEAP funding is in limbo, residents can still call their local Community Action Program (CAP) Agencies to apply for assistance. Once enrolled in the program, individuals may work out a payment plan that protects them from having their utilities disconnected during the coldest winter months.
