WASHINGTON, D.C. – Several key initiatives spearheaded by Senate Small Business and Entrepreneurship Committee Ranking Member Olympia J. Snowe (R-Maine) to spur American innovation and competitiveness were included in H.R. 5116, the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010, legislation that passed the House and Senate.  Chief among them are a provision to aid in the transformation of closed military installations into science parks and allowing additional R&D work at the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).

“Reauthorizing and improving upon the landmark America COMPETES Act sends a strong signal to the world that we are serious about building a bright economic future,” Senator Snowe said.  “I am pleased this vital legislation includes language I championed with Senator Mark Pryor to promote the continued development of science parks, which contribute more than $31 billion to the North American economy each year.”

The Pryor-Snowe science park language is a modified version of the Building a Stronger America Act (S. 583), which the senators introduced in March 2009 and was unanimously passed by the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation last December.  Senator Snowe included a provision in the legislation that enhances the ability of installations closed due to the Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) process to obtain grants when planning to build a science park.

Steve Levesque, Executive Director of the Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority, noted that the Snowe provision could assist his organization as it seeks to build a science park at the shuttering Brunswick Naval Air Station.

“We are ecstatic about the passage of this bill, as it will provide the Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority with additional economic tools to help implement the vision for the reuse of NAS Brunswick as Brunswick Landing: Maine’s Center of Innovation,” said Levesque. 

Senator Snowe also applauded the inclusion of a provision to enhance R&D at the FCC.  “By providing the FCC authority to conduct and coordinate research in its areas of jurisdiction, this language will facilitate domestic R&D in areas that are lagging,” said Senator Snowe.

The legislation now awaits President Obama’s signature before becoming law.
