Washington, DC — As President Obama prepares to sign into law legislation reauthorizing important school lunch and nutrition programs, U.S. Senator Tim Johnson (D-SD) today encouraged South Dakota schools to take part in the USDA’s HealthierUS School Challenge (HUSSC). The voluntary, national program helps local schools make lunches healthier and increase students’ physical activity.

“Schools are a lifeline for students and families, and it’s more important than ever that they provide nutritious meals and physical exercise for our kids. It will take a partnership at the federal and local levels to address this issue, and I encourage South Dakota schools to take part in the HealthierUS School Challenge,” said Johnson.

USDA’s HealthierUS School Challenge aims to recognize excellence in nutrition and physical activity. To become certified, schools have to meet certain nutrition standards in their menus, including an increased focus on fruits and vegetables and whole-grain products. Once certified, schools receive national recognition for the award.

In South Dakota, several districts, including the Custer and Huron School Districts, have already taken part in the program and have been recognized for their efforts. More information on the program can be found online at http://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/HealthierUS/index.html.

The President will sign the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010 into law in the coming days. The bill, which Johnson supported, strengthens the school lunch and nutrition assistance programs families depend on. The legislation reauthorizes all child nutrition programs and the special supplemental nutrition program for Women, Infants and Children though Fiscal Year 2015. The bill takes several important steps forward, including increasing reimbursement rates for lunches, which will help schools participate in the HUSSC.

According to the 2007 National Survey of Children’s Health, 13 percent of children ages 10 to 17 in South Dakota were categorized as obese, while only 25 percent participated in daily vigorous physical activity.  Nationwide increases in childhood obesity have led to additional health problems in children that were once confined to adults, including diabetes, high blood pressure and high cholesterol.

Johnson has been a strong supporter of federal nutrition programs that families, seniors and children across South Dakota turn to for proper nutrition.  As a member of the Senate Agriculture Appropriations Subcommittee, he is committed to securing funding for these highly effective programs.
