Washington, D.C. – Expressing concern that cancer patients may lose access to life-saving medications, U.S. Senator Amy Klobuchar is asking the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for immediate action to ensure adequate supplies of anti-cancer chemotherapy drugs.

“Lives are literally at stake with these medications,” Klobuchar said.  “For anyone struggling with cancer, the last thing they want to hear is that they might lose access to essential medications.  These drugs are designated by the FDA as medically necessary.  In some cases, substitute drugs aren’t available or they’re less effective.”

In a letter today to FDA Commissioner Margaret Hamburg, Klobuchar wrote: 

“I urge the FDA to find an immediate solution to the shortage of chemotherapy drugs, and to address the long-term challenges facing our nation’s drug supply.  It is essential that the FDA act now to ensure that patients have access to the medications that are essential to their health and well-being.”

The nationwide shortage of certain chemotherapy drugs has been noted by Minnesota hospitals and clinics, which have expressed alarm in recent weeks about the continuing shortage.

Experts say there are various reasons for the drug shortages, including manufacturing problems, production delays and financial trends in the pharmaceutical industry.

The text of Klobuchar’s letter to FDA Commissioner Margaret Hamburg is below.

December 3, 2010

Dr. Margaret Hamburg
Commissioner
Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Avenue
Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002

Dear Commissioner Hamburg,

I am writing about an issue that is vital to the continued care of individuals who rely on life-saving medications.  As you know, Minnesota is a leader in providing high-quality health care, especially when it comes to cancer research and medical innovations. 

It has been brought to my attention that certain hospitals and clinics in my state and around the country are facing a serious shortage of chemotherapy drugs.  As a result, providers are faced with the prospect of delaying chemotherapy treatments for patients. Others have been forced to adjust the chemotherapy regimens for some patients who have already started treatment.

Because people suffering from cancer have a narrow selection of treatment options, disruptions in the prescription drug supply chain can seriously jeopardize their access to these essential medications. This is a serious concern, and reflects the larger challenges in the way prescription drugs are manufactured and distributed.

Ensuring access to necessary and life-saving medications and vaccines is critical to the health of our nation’s patients. The American Society of Health-System Pharmacists maintains a list of 144 medications and vaccines in short supply, including certain chemotherapy medications.

I urge the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to work with pharmacy groups, manufacturers, and providers to find an immediate solution to the shortage of chemotherapy drugs, and to address the long-term challenges facing our nation’s drug supply.  It is essential that the FDA act now to ensure that patients have access to the medications that are essential to their health and well-being.  
                                                            
I look forward to working with you on this important issue.
