U.S. Senator Barbara Boxer (D-CA) today lauded U.S. Department of Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood’s announcement that more than $59 million in new funding from TIGER II grants will be used to improve California’s transportation infrastructure.  

Senator Boxer said, “These critical investments in California’s transportation system will speed up the creation of thousands of private sector jobs all across our state.”  

Senator Boxer was in Los Angeles today with other federal and state officials to announce a major new federal investment in the Crenshaw-LAX light-rail line, which was supported by a TIGER II grant. As Chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, Senator Boxer has been a leading advocate for Los Angeles’ 30/10 transit initiative, which is designed to accelerate local transportation investments.  

Secretary LaHood announced the new funding today as part of the TIGER II (Transportation Investment Generating Economic Recovery) Discretionary Grant Program, a competitive grant program that supports projects that promise significant economic and environmental benefits to a metropolitan area, region or state. The TIGER II program is funded through the FY2010 Consolidated Appropriations Act, which Senator Boxer supported.  

The California TIGER II grant recipients are:  

Project: San Bernardino Airport Access (Highland and San Bernardino, CA) 
Description: This capital grant award will expand roadway capacity to provide safe, direct, efficient freeway access on SR 210 and Del Rosa Drive to the new San Bernardino International Airport.
Grant Amount: $10,000,000

This project will widen the freeway interchange on the southbound SR 210 ramps at 5th Street, widen additional roadways, and improve drainage on 5th Street from SR 210 to Del Rosa Drive and along one-quarter mile of Del Rosa Drive from 5th Street to the primary airport entrance. The increase in roadway capacity will enable San Bernardino International Airport to increase cargo and passenger operations in a redevelopment on the former Norton Air Force Base site.
***  

Project: East Bay Pedestrian and Bicycle Network (Alameda and Contra Costa Counties, CA)
Description: This capital grant award will close several critical gaps in the nearly 200-mile bicycle and pedestrian trail system serving the 2.5 million residents of Contra Costa and Alameda counties.
Grant Amount: $10,200,000  

The projects will create bicycle and pedestrian grade separations, and establish better links to transit helping to complete this non-motorized transportation network. The projects to be funded through TIGER II parallel congested roads and highways and will provide access to commute alternatives including local and commuter buses and the Bay Area Rapid Transit system.
*** 

Project: Crenshaw-LAX Light Rail TIFIA Subsidy (Los Angeles County, CA) 
Description: This capital grant award will subsidize a $546 million TIFIA loan to construct a new 8.5-mile light rail line to extend between the Exposition Line (at Exposition/Crenshaw Station) and the Metro Green Line.
Grant Amount: $20,000,000 

The alignment of the Crenshaw/LAX Transit Corridor Project is a combination of at-grade, below-grade, and above-grade sections. The Project will include six to eight new stations, as follows: Exposition/Crenshaw, Crenshaw/Martin Luther King Jr., Crenshaw/Vernon (potential), Crenshaw/Slauson, Florence/West, Florence/La Brea, Aviation/Manchester (potential) and Aviation/Century. The project’s proposed Aviation/Century Station will establish a direct connection to LAX through the Automated People Mover to be constructed by Los Angeles World Airports (LAWA). The TIGER funding will be used to support a USDOT TIFIA loan of $546,000,000 dollars, approximately one-third of the total project cost. This project is a high-priority piece of the City’s 30/10 initiative, a bold effort to accelerate 30 years of transit capital investment into 10 years using innovative financing. 
***

Project: Port of Los Angeles (Los Angeles, CA) 
Description: This capital grant award will construct an intermodal rail yard, including staging and storage tracks connecting on-dock rail yards with the Alameda Corridor. It will also create a rail yard for the short-line railroad serving Union Pacific, Burlington Northern Santa Fe, the Port of Los Angeles and the Port of Long Beach.
Grant Amount: $16,000,000

The West Basin Rail yard will function as a critical link between the Port of Los Angeles and the Alameda Corridor, which carries about 15 percent of all waterborne containers entering/exiting the entire United States. By providing rail access from the dock to the Corridor, the project eliminates nearly 2,300 daily truck trips on local roads and I-710. Allowing this freight to move more efficiently will reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the port, increase the safety and state of good repair of existing roadways, and facilitate international trade. The project also removes two at-grade rail-highway crossings, relieving traffic congestion.
***  

Project: Oakland Army Base Infrastructure Master Plan (Oakland, CA) 
Description: This grant is awarded for the preparation of a comprehensive plan for two adjoining redevelopment areas: the Oakland Army Base Redevelopment Area and the West Oakland Redevelopment Area.
Grant Amount: $2,000,000

The Comprehensive Plan will contain two components: (1) an Infrastructure Master Plan and associated Environmental Impact Report for directing needed utility and roadway improvements for the former Oakland Army Base; and (2) a Specific Plan and associated Environmental Impact Report to guide future development in West Oakland and assist in capturing the benefits of the Army Base’s build out for the West Oakland community.

***

Project: Grand Boulevard: Removing Barriers to Livable Communities (San Mateo and Santa Clara Counties, CA)
Description: Nineteen cities, two counties, transit, labor, business and environmentalists are collaborating under the Grand Boulevard Initiative to integrate transportation and land use along a 43-mile state highway corridor.
Grant Amount: $1,097,240

El Camino Real functions more like a local street in places and an urban highway in others. Development is car-oriented and predominantly low density and strip-commercial, with few concentrations of both housing and jobs. The proposal is design El Camino Real as a complete street, focus on infill development near transit including housing, and update land use plans in 5 towns that still require the change.
