December 21, 2010 – Today, Nebraska’s Senator Ben Nelson voted in favor of moving to a final up or down vote on Senate ratification of the New START nuclear arms reduction treaty between the United States and Russia. The Senate voted 67-28 to move to that final vote, which could be held soon. Nelson made these comments today in support of the treaty:
“We have had six full days of debate now on the New START Treaty, more debate than for START I, and more than START II and the Moscow Treaty combined,” Senator Nelson said. “All that stands in the way are those who play the Washington parlor game of partisan politics, the spin doctors who enflame rather than inform and those who seem to want a return to the Cold War. And in this case it’s not only irresponsible, it’s dangerous to further delay the New START Treaty.
“Clearly, it will make Nebraskans safer, protect our national security, reduce the threat of terrorism and send a strong message to people around the world who want to stop nuclear proliferation, and those who wish to proliferate—like North Korea and Iran.
“We’ve gone about 380 days now without a nuclear arms reduction treaty, far too long for us not be able to examine Russia’s nuclear defenses and they ours. This treaty promotes Ronald Reagan’s maxim ‘Trust but verify.’ Without it, we’re in a situation of, ‘Hope we can trust, too bad we can’t verify.’ That’s not acceptable.
“This shouldn’t be about partisan politics, but unfortunately for some, it is. Some say we haven’t had enough time, but they are wrong. We’ve held 21 hearings and briefings in the Senate on the treaty; we’ve debated it for more than seven months. This New START Treaty is endorsed by all current and former secretaries of state, key current and former defense secretaries and seven former commanders of SAC and U.S. Strategic Command in Nebraska.
“It’s important that STRATCOM played a key role in the negotiating the treaty. With that experience, General Kevin Chilton, who just stepped down as commander, has said:
‘Our nation will be safer and more secure with this treaty than without it. What we negotiated to is absolutely acceptable to the United States Strategic Command for what we need to do to provide the deterrent for the country.’
“When it comes down to who have I listened to, I’ve listened to Gen. Chilton. I’ve listened to our military leaders, our diplomats and our nuclear treaty experts. And I’ve listened to Nebraskans. If it’s good enough for all of them, it’s good enough for me to support, and I do strongly support this treaty.
“All we need to do is look at recent tensions between North and South Korea, and the prospect for wider conflict bubbling up, to see the importance of this nuclear arms reduction treaty.
“There’s no good reason to not ratify the New START Treaty now, and countless reasons why we should. As Admiral Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, wrote yesterday, ‘The sooner it’s ratified, the better.’”
