During the Red River Valley Research Corridor Milestones and Horizons Conference held on Monday, Oct. 11, U.S. Senator Byron Dorgan (D-N.D.) honored three of the region’s innovators for their contributions to the Research Corridor. 

Don Mugan, director of the Great Plains STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) Center at Valley City State University (VCSU) received the “Pathfinder Award.” This award recognizes Mugan for achievement in developing and deploying breakthrough technologies, products, processes or services in the marketplace that have a significant effect on the way businesses and society operate.

Mugan has worked at VCSU since 1973. He has been a key figure in technology-related advances at the school. Mugan now leads the Great Plains STEM Center, where teachers and students receive training in some of the nation’s most cutting-edge technology.

Barry Batcheller, president and chief executive officer (CEO) of Fargo’s Appareo Systems, was presented with the “Discovery Award.” This award recognizes Batcheller for outstanding leadership and service in building and raising the visibility of the region’s research enterprise and for groundbreaking scientific and applied research that has a regional, national or global impact.

Batcheller’s company produces cutting-edge devices and software for aerospace, defense and transportation applications worldwide. In a short time, his company has grown and achieved great success. In fact, Appareo ranked in Inc. Magazine’s top 500 fastest-growing companies list this year. Batcheller is also the founder of Fargo’s Phoenix International Corp.

Joel Jorgenson, founder and CEO of Fargo’s Packet Digital, received the additional Discovery Award. Jorgenson’s company works to reduce the weight and extend the life of power supplies for portable electronic devices and defense systems. Packet Digital appeared on Inc. Magazine’s top 500 fastest-growing companies list in 2008.

“North Dakotans should be extremely proud of these Research Corridor leaders for their work in high-tech education and business development,” Dorgan said. “Their work will help continue to produce high-tech leaders and develop cutting-edge products in our state for many years to come.”

The 2010 Research Corridor Milestones and Horizons Conference was an event that recognized the impact the Research Corridor initiative has had in North Dakota and provided the region’s innovators with a means to build upon what has been achieved.

Senator Dorgan announced Monday at the event that the Research Corridor has produced $1 billion in economic activity in the region and created more than 10,000 jobs in North Dakota since the initiative’s start in 2002. Also, new data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics show that job growth in the Research Corridor for the last eight years far exceeds job growth in neighboring states.

This new information comes in addition to other recent reports boasting the Research Corridor’s success. In June 2008, a Milken Institute study showed that North Dakota had the fastest-growing research industry out of any state in the nation. In April 2009, the National Science Foundation said that North Dakota was the third fastest-growing state for federal research projects. And in May 2010, Inc. Magazine said the Research Corridor is one of 20 areas nationwide “where great ideas are born.”

As a senior member of the U.S. Senate’s Appropriations Committee, Dorgan has worked aggressively to increase high-tech research, development and commercialization in North Dakota. He has directed nearly $700 million in federal investments to Research Corridor activities. Dorgan is currently working to secure additional funding in fiscal year 2011 to significantly boost the ongoing research and development in the Research Corridor.
