U.S. Senator Charles E. Schumer today announced that the Omnibus appropriations bill includes $500,000 for Alfred State College of Applied Technology's Renewable Energy Technical Training Center. The funding would be used to prepare students for careers in the burgeoning clean energy sector.

 

"Alfred State is laying down the foundation for broad-based economic growth in both the near- and long-term," Schumer said. "This federal funding will ensure that students have the training necessary to excel in an increasingly competitive job market."

 

Previously, Senator Schumer successfully fought to get this funding included in the Senate Energy and Water Appropriations Subcommittee's bill, and then in the full committee’s bill.

 

Alfred States' new clean energy curriculum will give students hands-on experience in the emerging field of clean energy by training them to manufacture and implement clean energy technologies. Currently, the clean energy industry pumps $970 billion into the nation's economy every year, supporting 8.5 million jobs, with a projected 40 million new jobs coming by 2030. The curriculum will match students with employers who increasingly seek skilled workers that can hit the ground running in the field. The program will create the economic conditions for long term growth in the clean energy industry across the Southern Tier and New York.

 

Alfred State College was founded in 1908 and became part of the SUNY system in 1948. Alfred State College's School of Applied Technology consists of 20 buildings on a 21-acre campus in Wellsville. The school offers Associate and Bachelor degrees in architectural engineering and biological science, among other fields. The newest addition to the Applied Technology School will be a clean energy curriculum that will be financed in part by $500,000 in funding that Schumer has secured in the FY11 Omnibus Appropriations bill.

 

The Omnibus still needs to pass the Senate, but inclusion in this critical spending bill is a huge step forward.  The Senate is poised to vote on the bill in the coming week.  If the bill is not passed, the Senate will either have to pass a continuing resolution, funding the government at the 2010 levels, or the federal government will be forced to shut down.
