Senator Chris Dodd (D-CT) delivered a speech on the floor of the U.S. Senate yesterday urging the support of the Public Safety Employer-Employee Cooperation Act, which would guarantee our nation’s fire fighters, law enforcement officers, and emergency medical personnel the right to bargain collectively with their employers. 

“The bipartisan Public Safety Employer-Employee Cooperation Act is a critical next step towards fulfilling our commitment to the men and women who keep us safe,” said Dodd. “The right to collectively bargain has been proven over time to improve cooperation between employers and employees. This cooperation leads to better, fairer compensation and benefits. It contributes to improved work conditions and safety. And it makes the quality of services better and more efficient for everyone.”

Dodd has a long history of advocating for the safety of emergency personnel. In 2000, he authored the FIRE Act, which gives local fire departments the ability to purchase new equipment and initiate education and training programs. In 2003, Dodd authored the SAFER Act, which gives local fire departments the ability to alleviate critical shortfalls in professional and volunteer personnel. Earlier this year, Dodd introduced the Fire Grant Reauthorization Act of 2010, which would reauthorize both programs for five years.

Video of Dodd’s speech can be found on CSPAN.org.

The full text of Dodd’s speech is below: 

Mr. President, I rise today to speak in support of the Public Safety Employer-Employee Cooperation Act and of the need to pass this important bill before the end of this Congress. 

This is a bipartisan measure that will guarantee our nation’s fire fighters, law enforcement officers, and emergency medical personnel the right to bargain collectively with their employers.

I want to thank Senator Gregg for his long-standing commitment to this critically important legislation, which was originally championed here in the Senate by my good friend, and our colleague, Senator Ted Kennedy.

We ask our nation’s first responders to put their lives on the line each and every day.

What they do is less a job than it is a calling. 

Throughout my career in public service, I have had the privilege to meet and work with countless first responders. Police, fire fighters, emergency medical personnel—they do exceptional work under the most difficult of circumstances.

In particular, I have come to appreciate the unique and multi-faceted challenges faced by fire fighters.

We’ve all felt our chests tighten and our pulses quicken with anxiety at the sound of a fire engine screaming through town.

We’ve seen the determination on the faces of the people on those rigs. For them, all the commotion is just another day at the office.

When the unthinkable happens—a devastating hurricane, industrial accident, terrorist attack, or three-alarm fire—these brave men and women are the first on the scene, hurtling into danger, to save lives. 

Just this past year fire fighters in my home state of Connecticut have been faced with many serious challenges—and have met them every time.

In February, when a massive natural gas explosion at a power plant under construction in Middletown, Connecticut killed six people and injured more than two dozen others, fire fighters from eight surrounding towns rushed to the scene. 

They remained for hours and days afterwards, searching for victims and working to ensure that all the plant workers were accounted for. 

When massive flooding hit several parts of my state, local fire fighters worked around the clock responding to calls from panicked residents. They dealt with hazardous materials and even helped to pump out flooded basements.

They are committed to keeping our communities safe, even when that means putting their own lives at risk for the sake of protecting ours. 

In the abstract, this can be hard to keep in perspective.

But unfortunately, the community of Bridgeport, Connecticut was recently reminded just what this commitment means. 

A week ago, two fire fighters, Lt. Steven Velasquez and Michel ‘Mitch’ Baik, were killed while fighting a fire in a home in that community. Three of their colleagues were also injured. 

All of these individuals were incredibly brave—they entered a burning building to search for survivors and try to prevent the emergency from spreading.

This tragedy highlights just how selfless and courageous these people are each and every day. 

And it should remind us all that, just as they have made a solemn commitment to us, so too must we affirm our commitment to them.

Part of our commitment is to ensure that they never, ever, put their lives at risk on our behalf without the proper equipment and training.

I have worked tirelessly over the years to ensure that this commitment is kept. 

That is why I authored the Firefighter Investment and Response Enhancement (FIRE) Act back in 2000. This legislation created the first competitive grant program to assist local fire departments in addressing a wide range of equipment, training, and other fire prevention needs.

To date, Mr. President, this program has provided more than $5.2 billion directly to fire departments. 

And these grants haven’t just gone to the largest metropolitan areas. Fire departments in small and medium-sized communities across the country have received funds through the program—including departments in 150 of the 169 towns in my home state of Connecticut. 

In 2003, we built on the success of the FIRE program by passing the Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency Response Firefighters (SAFER) bill, which I also authored. 

This program provides funds to ensure that fire departments are adequately staffed. Since the program began, more than $1.1 billion has helped to put over 75,000 additional firefighters in our nation’s firehouses.

I am extremely proud to have been able to work with my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to get these important programs enacted. 

But our commitment to our public safety community is still not complete. 

Mr. President, as you know, the bipartisan Public Safety Employer-Employee Cooperation Act is a critical next step towards fulfilling our commitment to the men and women who keep us safe. 

As we know, fire fighters, police, and emergency medical personnel have a special place in the workforce and in society. They are respected for what they do. But they are also respected for doing it no matter what they face.

Once they get the call, they don’t get to decide whether to take it or not—they just go. 

We depend on them every day, and they respond with unquestioned dedication. 

They’re looking out for our well-being. Do we not owe it to them to look out for theirs?

In many states these brave men and women are deprived one of the most basic rights that workers in America have—to bargain collectively with their employers. 

The right to collectively bargain has been proven over time to improve cooperation between employers and employees. 

This cooperation leads to better, fairer compensation and benefits. It contributes to improved work conditions and safety. And it makes the quality of services better and more efficient for everyone. 

Quality and efficiency is vitally important in the field of public safety. It can be the difference between an emergency and a tragedy. 

I know that improving public safety is a goal that I share with every single member of this body.

The Public Safety Employer-Employee Cooperation Act is a carefully crafted bill that grants these rights to all first responders, without disrupting their vital role in emergency response.

While it requires that all states provide public safety workers with the most basic of collective bargaining rights, it also gives states the flexibility to implement plans that work best for them.

These include the right to form and join unions, and to collectively bargain over wages, hours and working conditions—rights that many states, including my state of Connecticut, already provide to these workers. 

The bill also allows states with right-to-work laws—which prohibit contracts requiring union membership for employment—to continue to enforce those laws. 

Importantly, the bill explicitly provides for safeguards against the disruption of emergency services. It does this with strong language explicitly prohibiting any strikes, lockouts, or other work stoppages. 

Of course, Mr. President, this legislation is about more than negotiating wages, hours, and benefits. For our nation’s first responders, this cooperation means so much more. 

It means that the men and women who risk their lives every day keeping us safe can sit down and relate their real life experiences to their employers.

It also means that their on-the-ground expertise will be used to help public safety agencies improve services in the community. 

When tragedies have struck us, from the September 11 attacks to Hurricane Katrina, to house fires in our communities, these workers were the first on the scene and the last to leave. 

We owe them everything, and all they ask in return is the dignity and respect in the workplace that all workers deserve. 

The legislation before us is important to them; therefore, it should be important to us. 

I urge my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to join me in upholding our commitment to millions of first responders across the country by voting to pass this important legislation during the 111th Congress.

I yield the floor.
