WASHINGTON, D.C. - Amid news of continuing problems at Arlington National Cemetery, the Senate today passed legislation to help the new leadership at the cemetery structure a plan to identify and remedy errors like the ones uncovered recently. The legislation - introduced by Senators Claire McCaskill (D-MO) along with her colleagues Scott Brown (R-MA), Joseph Lieberman (I-CT), Susan Collins (R-ME), and Richard Burr (R-NC) - follows a hearing this summer in the Senate Subcommittee on Contracting Oversight which revealed the possibility of thousands of unmarked or improperly marked gravesites.

When problems first emerged at the cemetery, the senators pledged to follow up on the results and ensure that the Army investigated and systematically fixed problems, and the legislation follows through on the promise. The legislation passed today directs the Secretary of the Army to review and report to Congress on the progress being made at Arlington to fix errors in burial records and improve contract oversight at the cemetery.

"I am outraged at the problems that continue to surface at Arlington Cemetery. The families that have loved ones at Arlington Cemetery deserve so much better than this. These are our heroes. This is the most sacred ground we have in the United States, and we've got to make sure we have the appropriate oversight," McCaskill said. "After our July hearing, I made a promise to the American public and to the families of those brave men and women buried at Arlington that the hearing would not be the end of Congress's oversight of this problem. I'm confident that the Army and the Cemetery are both taking this very seriously, but this legislation will help hold the folks at Arlington accountable for their progress in identifying and fixing any errors in the burial records, changing the way they manage contracts, and for their efforts to reach out to families who are suffering from this unnecessary heartbreak."

Watch video of McCaskill speaking on the Senate floor about the legislation

Many of the previous problems at Arlington National Cemetery resulted from a failed effort to automate how the cemetery tracks burial records and manages burial operations. Despite spending between $5 and $8 million on multiple IT contracts over seven years, the cemetery's complex records remain in paper form and prone to human errors. The documents and information that were presented at the July hearing suggest that thousands of graves may be unmarked, improperly marked, or mislabeled on the cemetery's maps.

Following a June 2010 U.S. Army Inspector General (IG) report that found many of the problems at Arlington National Cemetery, the Secretary of the Army established a new organizational structure at the cemetery and created a new leadership position that reports directly to the secretary. A senior official from the Department of Veterans Affairs, which successfully manages over 130 veterans cemeteries nationwide, is also helping the Army to sort out the problems and reorganize the oversight and management systems at Arlington National Cemetery.

The legislation passed today will codify the new organizational structure and ensure that the management at Arlington is accountable to Congress. Specifically, the legislation will:

Require the Secretary of the Army to report to Congress on the Cemetery's ability to verify the identity, location and burial records for every gravesite at Arlington National Cemetery and the plans to remedy any errors found.

Require the Secretary of the Army to report to Congress on the progress at Arlington on changing the management and oversight structure at Arlington National Cemetery, including contract management and practices for providing information and outreach to families of individuals buried at Arlington.

Require the Government Accountability Office to oversee and report to Congress on the management and oversight of contracts at Arlington National Cemetery, including oversight of:

All contracts for the automation of burial operations

Cemetery contract management and coordination with Army contracting agencies

Any corrective action taken to address the IG report's findings

The Cemetery's compliance with directives from the Secretary of the Army and recommendations from the Army National Cemeteries Advisory Commission

Cemetery practices for providing information and outreach to families of individuals buried at Arlington

Feasibility and advisability of transferring the control of Arlington National Cemetery and the Soldiers' and Airmen's Home National Cemetery to the Department of Veterans Affairs.
