I rise to speak in support of Solicitor General Elena Kagan to be an Associate Justice on the U.S. Supreme Court.  I am confident that Solicitor General Kagan is highly qualified for this prestigious position.  She has worked hard and earned a place at the top of the legal profession.

During her career, she has held various positions across the federal government that have prepared her well for this new position.  As Solicitor General since 2009, she worked on many issues currently before the Court.  She has argued a broad range of issues - from defending Congress' ability to protect kids from child predators to the United States' ability to go after those supporting terrorist organizations.    

Through several different assignments in the Clinton White House, Elena Kagan worked for the President on the challenges facing our nation.  She also has experience in the judicial branch, including clerkships in the U.S. Supreme Court as well as the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit. 

Solicitor General Kagan also spent many years as a professor of law at the University of Chicago Law School and Harvard Law School.  As Dean of Harvard Law School, she worked with the student body to improve the quality of student life and encourage a spirit of public service.  

She also worked as a lawyer in private practice.  In all, she has spent years studying complex legal theories and debating issues.  Some of the most difficult issues end up at the Supreme Court and each justice needs a thorough understanding of the law.  Elena Kagan has demonstrated her knowledge of the law and I believe she will be a successful jurist.          

Her nomination to our nation's highest court is something our entire country can be proud of.  In recent years, we have taken many positive steps to make our government a better reflection of the American people.  Solicitor General Kagan's confirmation as Associate Justice will continue that progress and mark the first time the U.S. will have three women on the Supreme Court at the same time.  This is a wonderful milestone for our country.

I was very impressed with Elena Kagan when we met earlier this year.  We talked about Hawaii and the importance of reconciliation with Native Hawaiians.  I was impressed with her history of building consensus and bringing people together, as well as her knowledge of the law.  

I know that she will do a tremendous job upholding our Constitution as an Associate Justice on the U.S. Supreme Court.  After receiving many letters of support for Solicitor General Kagan's nomination, and seeing for myself her character, her intelligence, and her legal expertise, I am pleased to support her nomination, and urge my colleagues to do the same.
