WASHINGTON — U.S. Sens. Debbie Stabenow and Carl Levin, both D-Mich., congratulated West Bloomfield Public Library today for receiving the nation’s highest honor for libraries. The Institute of Museum and Library Service will present the National Medal for Museum and Library Service to the library at an upcoming Washington, D.C. ceremony along with a $10,000 award. West Bloomfield Township Public Library is one of five libraries in the nation to receive the honor. One other Michigan library, Peter White Public Library in Marquette, also received the award this year.
 
“The West Bloomfield Township Public Library truly merits this recognition, and I am proud to see them named as one of the winners of the 2010 National Medal for Museum and Library Service,” Stabenow said. “I have had the pleasure of seeing their work first-hand and know that they are creating partnerships with the community to help Michigan families, especially in addressing early literacy.  During these difficult economic times, they have also worked hard to help people looking for work find the resources and information they need.” 

“While many might think of their local library as simply a place to quietly work and to check out books, that is not the case for West Bloomfield Township, whose residents have a great deal of resources available to them through the West Bloomfield Township Public Library,” Levin said.
“This library is truly a comprehensive educational environment, where children can learn and socialize, parents can get medical guidance, and families get support they need for healthy and happy development. The library has gone further in these times of economic need, helping unemployed residents with job workshops and search assistance. West Bloomfield Township Public Library has gone above and beyond the call of duty, and for that they are truly deserving of this award.”
 
More information on the Institute of Museum and Library Service National Medal for Museum and Library Service can be found at http://imls.gov/news/2010/111610.shtm .
