Thank you, Mr. President. I rise to speak in opposition to the nomination of Timothy Giethner to be Secretary of the Treasury.

Of the many positions in the federal government about to be filled, the Treasury Secretary is among the most critical today. We are confronting a severe financial panic, and one false move by the Secretary of the Treasury could result in years of stagnation and high unemployment.

Even before the disclosure of Mr. Geithner’s tax problems, I had serious reservations about his nomination. Mr. Geithner has been involved in just about every flawed bailout action of the previous administration. He was the front-line regulator in New York when all the so-called financial innovations that have recently brought our markets to their knees became widespread. He went along with the flawed monetary policy decisions of Alan Greenspan and Ben Bernanke. And he stretched the law beyond recognition to bail out Bear Stearns, and later A.I.G. All those actions or failures to act raise questions about the nominee’s judgment, but his failure to pay his Social Security and Medicare taxes despite clear evidence he knew he owed the taxes reflects negligence or worse toward the laws he will be responsible for enforcing.

The financial crisis we are in the middle of today did not happen overnight and it could have been avoided. Easy monetary policy under former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan provided the fuel for a speculative asset bubble that eventually had to pop. Mr. Geithner helped Chairman Greenspan keep pouring that fuel on the fire from the day he got to the New York Fed.

More careful regulation by Mr. Greenspan, his successor Ben Bernanke, and other regulators could have better contained the damage from the bubble. Mr. Geithner sat at their side from 2003 until now, yet he raised no objections to their flawed regulation.

Even worse than supporting the flawed Greenspan and Bernanke policies, Mr. Geithner failed himself as a regulator. One of Mr. Geithner’s most important jobs was to prevent the collapse of largest and most important banks. Just one look at Citigroup today shows he failed at that job. Although he talked about the threat of systemic risk, Mr. Geithner sat idly by as risk became more and more concentrated in the hands of a few large financial institutions and the pricing of risk became detached from reality. Trillions of dollars in savings held by Americans are being destroyed as a result.

When the crisis worsened last fall, Mr. Geithner helped craft the $700 billion bailout presented to Congress. The Geithner/Paulson/Bernanke plan, as sold to Congress, was to buy up toxic assets to bail out their Wall Street buddies — no strings attached. But soon, Treasury changed course, choosing to take equity in banks – an option explicitly rejected before Congress. Sadly, Mr. Geithner went along with all these decisions.

Finally, we have learned that Mr. Geithner is comfortable with giving tax dollars away but not so much with paying them himself. Documents show he repeatedly acknowledged his tax obligation and ignored clear instructions to pay. I find Mr. Geithner’s explanation that this was just a careless mistake unconvincing and unsupported by the facts.

His failure to pay what he owed cost Social Security and Medicare more than $34,000, part of which would never have been repaid if Mr. Geithner was not nominated to be Treasury Secretary – a position which oversees tax enforcement. And he was able to convince the IRS to refund the penalties they initially charged. I hope Mr. Geithner will remember his experience when considering the tax issues of ordinary Americans.

This is all the more unfortunate because America needs a strong and credible Treasury Secretary now more than ever. The most recent Secretary treated Congress with borderline contempt and hostility. He was not forthcoming with information or explanations, only marching orders. I do believe Mr. Geithner understands the important role Congress has to play in our economic policies, and until his evasive and unsatisfactory answers about his tax problems, I thought he would at least do a better job than Secretary Paulson at working with Congress. If Mr. Geithner is indeed confirmed, I hope he will follow through on his promises to be responsive and respectful to Congress.

Mr. President, for all the reasons I have discussed, I cannot in good conscience support this nomination. I yield the floor.
