U.S. Senators Johnny Isakson, R-Ga., and Saxby Chambliss, R-Ga., today sent a letter to President Obama expressing strong concern that Iran continues to enrich uranium and is aggressively pursuing a nuclear capability aimed at developing nuclear weapons, as well as continues to fund and train terrorists. The letter urges the president to fully implement sanctions against Iran and to keep pressure on that nation to stop pursuing a nuclear weapons capability.

The letter was sent as both President Obama and Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad are in New York City this week to address the General Assembly of the United Nations.

The text of the letter is below:

Dear Mr. President:

We write to urge you to do everything in your power to prevent Iran from achieving nuclear weapons capability. A nuclear Iran will threaten its neighbors in the Middle East, the United States, and the world, and it is our belief that all options should be on the table in halting Iran's nuclear ambitions.

First and foremost, we remain concerned that Iran continues to enrich uranium and is aggressively pursuing nuclear capability aimed at developing nuclear weapons. International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) inspectors continue to be denied entry into Iran in order to perform necessary inspections. IAEA Director General, Yukiya Amano, was recently reported as saying, "Iran's repeated objection to the designation of inspectors with experience in Iran's nuclear fuel cycle and facilities hampers the inspection process."

As you know, on June 9, 2010, the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 1929, imposing a new round of sanctions on Iran. Furthermore, on June 24, 2010, the United States Congress passed H.R.2194, the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act of 2010, which you signed into law on July 1, 2010. We are pleased by these recent steps forward, and hope that you will ensure full implementation of these sanctions and continue to put the pressure on Iran. 

Secondly, we are concerned that Iran continues to support international terrorism. According to the recently released Department of State's 2009 report on international terrorism, Iran "remained the most active state sponsor of terrorism" in 2009. We urge you to prevent Iran from funding and training terrorists that threaten our allies and undermine peace, including Hamas and Hezbollah. The United States must ensure that Iran and its terrorist proxies in the region do not derail the momentum of the current peace process.

Lastly, as you know, on September 23, 2010, Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad will address the United Nations General Assembly. Please do not let his remarks go unchallenged. We urge you and your administration to state unequivocally that the United States and our allies will prevent Iran from further threatening its neighbors by destabilizing the region and igniting a nuclear-arms race.

Thank you for your consideration.
