The North Dakota Chapter of the American College of Physicians (ACP) today honored Senator Kent Conrad for his efforts to enhance the accessibility, affordability, and quality of health care in the state.
 
Citing their appreciation of his leadership in improving the health of the people of North Dakota, Dr. Julie Blehm, governor elect for the North Dakota Chapter of the ACP, presented Senator Conrad with their Community Service Award. 
 
“We are recognizing Senator Kent Conrad because of the work he has done to improve access to health care and the quality of care in North Dakota and the nation.  His support of making affordable health care coverage available to the vast majority of Americans is appreciated by the College," said Dr. Blehm.
 
"We've made enormous strides in improving America's health care system.  This would not be possible without the medical professionals, who have dedicated their lives to caring for North Dakotans.  They have shared their experience and expertise as we have worked together to reform our health care system," Senator Conrad said.  "We still have a lot of work to do, and I am pleased to have the support of the North Dakota Chapter of the American College of Physicians as we work to increase access to health care."
 
The ACP is a national organization of doctors who specialize in the prevention, detection and treatment of illnesses in adults.  ACP is the largest medical-specialty organization, and second-largest physician group in the United States.
 
Signed into law earlier this year, the Affordable Care Act will expand access to quality, affordable health care to more than 30 million additional Americans, provide assistance to help North Dakota’s families and small businesses afford health insurance, and cut the budget deficit by $143 billion over the first 10 years.
 
The new law is especially good for North Dakota as it dramatically improves Medicare reimbursement rates for the state and will bring hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue to North Dakota hospitals and clinics, allowing them to provide better care to the patients who depend on them.
