Senator Kent Conrad today explained how emergency federal actions helped stave off an even greater economic disaster.  At a press briefing in Bismarck, the Senator recalled the dire economic situation facing the country in the fall of 2008 and how federal action in the form of the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) and the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act prevented an economic collapse.

"By mid to late 2008, America was in the midst of the worst recession since the Great Depression.  As distasteful and unpopular as TARP and the stimulus plan were, they were necessary and successful in preventing a complete economic collapse in our country," Senator Conrad said.  “If the federal government had not acted as it did, the recession would have been far worse – impacting every corner of the nation, including North Dakota."

In the fall of 2008, banks were failing, the housing market was crashing, and the stock market was losing vast sums of money.  Senator Conrad — the Chairman of the Senate Budget Committee —told how he was in a weekend meeting in the Capitol where then-Treasury Secretary Paulson was receiving messages about major financial institutions failing around the world.  Senator Conrad said he was told that if the U.S. did not act by that Sunday evening, the Asian and U.S. markets would open and collapse within hours.

“We were not acting to save banks and financial markets,” explained Senator Conrad.  “We were acting to save the American people from millions of additional job losses and untold economic suffering.  The record is clear – what we did worked and worked quite well.  The financial system has largely stabilized, markets have begun to recover, and our economy did not collapse into a depression.”  

In recent testimony before the Senate Budget Committee, two of the nation's most distinguished economists, Alan Blinder, former Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve, and Mark Zandi, the top economist at Moody’s and a former campaign advisor to Senator John McCain, concluded that the combination of federal actions, including TARP and the Recovery Act, avoided what would have been “Great Depression 2.0.”  They estimated that without TARP and the Recovery Act, unemployment today would be about 15 percent and the economy would have about 8 million fewer jobs.

Former President George W. Bush said a decision to use taxpayer money to bolster the financial system in 2008 wasn’t difficult and was needed to avoid an economic collapse.  During an appearance this week at The University of Texas, Bush said, "Depression, no depression.... It wasn’t that hard for me, just so you know. I made the decision to use your money to prevent the collapse from happening."
