“The Nunn-Lugar program has made possible, through operations of the United States military, United States contractors, working with their counterparts in Russia, the destruction of very sizeable amounts of nuclear weapons. Threats we took very seriously in 1991 and I hope Americans take very seriously currently.”
 
U.S. Sen. Dick Lugar took to the floor of the United States Senate for a second day as the Senate works to approve the New START Treaty.
 
Lugar emphasized the urgency of continued cooperation with Russia, specifically the New START Treaty, as demonstrated through the work of the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction Program. A video of Lugar’s speech today is available on his YouTube page at http://www.youtube.com/senatorlugar#p/u/0/wcFsSNBIPzk. 
 
During the speech, Lugar announced the following progress in the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction program since October.
 
·    8 submarine launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) destroyed,
-   10 nuclear weapons transport trains shipments and
·    110.9 metric tons of chemical weapons agent neutralized.  
 
In November 1991, Lugar (R-IN) and Sen. Sam Nunn (D-GA) authored the Nunn-Lugar Act, which established the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program. This program has provided U.S. funding and expertise to help the former Soviet Union safeguard and dismantle its enormous stockpiles of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, related materials, and delivery systems. In 2003, Congress adopted the Nunn-Lugar Expansion Act, which authorized the Nunn-Lugar program to operate outside the former Soviet Union to address proliferation threats. In 2004, Nunn-Lugar funds were committed for the first time outside of the former Soviet Union to destroy chemical weapons in Albania, under a Lugar-led expansion of the program. In 2007, Lugar announced the complete destruction of Albania’s chemical weapons.
 
The Nunn-Lugar scorecard now totals 7,599 strategic nuclear warheads deactivated, 791 intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) destroyed, 498 ICBM silos eliminated, 180 ICBM mobile launchers destroyed, 659 submarine launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) eliminated, 492 SLBM launchers eliminated, 32 nuclear submarines capable of launching ballistic missiles destroyed, 155 bomber eliminated, 906 nuclear air-to-surface missiles (ASMs) destroyed, 194 nuclear test tunnels eliminated, 503 nuclear weapons transport train shipments secured, upgraded security at 24 nuclear weapons storage sites, built and equipped 20 biological monitoring stations, and neutralized 1680.4 metric tons of Russian and Albanian chemical weapons agent. Perhaps most importantly, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and Belarus are nuclear weapons free as a result of cooperative efforts under the Nunn-Lugar program. Those countries were the third, fourth and eighth largest nuclear weapons powers in the world.
 
Lugar makes annual oversight trips to Nunn-Lugar sites around the world.
 
The Nunn-Lugar program: http://lugar.senate.gov/nunnlugar/
The Nunn-Lugar scorecard: http://lugar.senate.gov/nunnlugar/scorecard.html
