Senate Military Family Caucus Co-Chairs Senators Barbara Boxer (D-CA) and Richard Burr (R-NC) today lauded the Senate passage of a concurrent resolution honoring military families during Military Family Month, which is marked each November.  

Senator Burr said, “During the month of November, Americans gather together to give thanksgiving for our families and our country, so it is both fitting and necessary to set aside time to honor our military families as well.  At great personal sacrifice, they provide the support that our servicemen and women rely upon as they serve in the finest armed forces in the world.  This will be the tenth consecutive year in which thousands of our service members and their military families will be separated during the holidays.  I am personally very grateful for the selflessness and patriotism of our military families, and I hope that others will have them in their thoughts and join me in honoring them this November.”  

Senator Boxer said, “The strength of our military is grounded in the strength of our military families.  As we celebrate Military Family Month, I am inspired by the selflessness and courage of our troops and their families, and grateful for the sacrifices they make every day in service to our nation.  I am proud to join my Senate colleagues in honoring these incredible families.”

The Senate Military Family Caucus works closely with the House Military Family Caucus to improve programs and services for military families, and to focus on the unique and growing challenges they face. The Caucus aims to substantively address the challenges faced by military families including childcare, education, employment, health care and the effects of multiple deployments on the mental health and well-being of spouses, caregivers and children.   

Along with Boxer and Burr, additional cosponsors of the resolution are Senators Max Baucus (D-MT), Mark Begich (D-AK), Michael F. Bennet (D-CO), Scott Brown (R-MA), Richard Durbin (D-IL), Kay R. Hagan (D-NC), Mike Johanns (R-NE), John F. Kerry (D-MA), Amy Klobuchar (D-MN), Frank R. Lautenberg (D-NJ), Joe Lieberman (ID-CT), Blanche Lincoln (D-AR), Robert Menendez (D-NJ), Lisa Murkowski (R-AK), Patty Murray (D-WA), Ben Nelson (D-NE), Mark Pryor (D-AR), Bernie Sanders (I-VT) and Jeanne Shaheen (D-NH).

The full text of the Senators’ resolution is below: 

                                         CONCURRENT RESOLUTION 
To Recognize and Honor the Commitment and Sacrifices of Military Families of the United States. 

Whereas the month of November marks Military Family Month; 

Whereas the freedom and security the citizens of the United States enjoy today are a result of the continued dedication and vigilance of the Armed Forces throughout the history of the United States; 

Whereas the security of the United States depends on the readiness and retention of the men and women of the Armed Forces, a force comprised of active, National Guard, and Reserve personnel; 

Whereas military families are an integral source of strength for the Soldiers, Sailors, Marines, Airmen, and Coastguardsmen of the United States, and have continually proven their dedication, service, and willingness to make great sacrifices in support of service members of the United States; 

Whereas military families often endure unique circumstances that are central to military life, including long separations from their loved ones, the uncertainty and demands of multiple deployments, school and job transfers, and frequent moves from communities where they have established roots and relationships; 

Whereas military family members have become the central support system for each other as they reinforce units through family readiness efforts and initiatives, support service members within the units, and reach out to the families whose loved ones have been deployed; and 

Whereas it is important to recognize the sacrifices, support, and dedication of the families of the men and women who serve in the Armed Forces;  

Now, therefore be it
Resolved by the Senate (the House of Representatives concurring), That Congress— 

          (1) recognizes the commitment and ever-increasing sacrifices military families make every day during the current era of protracted conflict; 

          (2) honors the families of the Armed Forces and thanks the families for their dedication and service to the United States; and 

          (3) encourages the citizens of the United States to recognize, commemorate, and honor the role and contribution of the military family, including selfless service that ensures freedom and preserves the quality of life in the United States.
