Even in today’s sluggish economy, general aviation remains a leading U.S. industry.  Employing more than 1.2 million people; contributing $150 billion to the U.S. economy annually; and exporting 40% of all American-produced components, general aviation is one of the top domestic industries fueling our nation’s economy.  I’m proud to say that Kansas continues to be a leader in this vital industry.

According to a recently released Brookings Institution report, general aviation continues to drive the nation’s economic growth through significant increases in export opportunities.  The report recognizes the world-class Wichita Kansas Aviation Cluster by naming Wichita as the leading U.S. city for exports measured by gross metropolitan product. 

 
Despite this good news, we all know that general aviation has experienced a major downturn since the fall of 2008.  In the past two years, 13,000 Kansans lost their jobs in the general aviation industry.  Unfortunately, some members of Congress, officials in the White House, and members of the media have criticized the use by business executives of general aviation aircraft.  These attacks are uncalled for and unhelpful.   
 
In addition to the domestic challenges facing general aviation, the industry also faces unfair international competition.  Some foreign governments are heavily subsidizing – sometimes illegally – their domestic aircraft industries.  It is critical that we fully engage the competition and pursue all means necessary to ensure that an important U.S. industry is not negatively affected by the illegal actions of foreign governments. 
 
Brazil in particular has made a concerted effort to expand its presence in the general aviation market through Embraer, one of Brazil’s largest exporters and employers.  Since entering the business aviation market in 2002, Embraer is now responsible for about 14% of all global sales of business aircraft. 
 
This is an almost unbelievable feat for a company that has been manufacturing business aviation aircraft for a little over seven years.  Considering similar statistics from previous years that were later proven to be the result of illegal subsidization of aircraft by the European Union, Embraer’s activity does not seem possible without heavy and creative government support across the board. 
 
After meeting with representatives from industry and discussions with the U.S. International Trade Commission and the U.S. Trade Representative, I have determined that there is a need for a thorough analysis of the global competitiveness of the U.S. business jet aircraft industry.  Similar to previous studies on the global large civil aircraft market and the competitiveness of U.S. industry, we should authorize the ITC to do an analysis of the general aviation market.
I am working with my colleagues who sit on the Senate Finance Committee to request that the ITC investigate the global competiveness of the U.S business aircraft industry and whether foreign government actions or subsidizations have had a negative impact on this industry.  Specifically, the ITC should focus on the business aircraft industry in the United States, China, Brazil, Canada, and Europe, examining the composition of the current industry and the factors of competition in the global industry.  
 
This study should also analyze the current structure of each country’s business jet aircraft industry, developments in the global market that impact sales of business jet aircraft, and analyze significant developments and trends that may affect the future competitiveness of the U.S. business jet aircraft industry in the future.
 
For years, Kansas has been leading the way in the general aviation industry, and I know that if everyone plays by the rules, Kansans will easily rise above the competition.  With the ITC report, we will have a better understanding of the global players in the general aviation industry and how the U.S. can ensure we are all competing on a level playing field.
