Washington, DC — As National American Indian and Alaska Native Heritage Month continues, U.S. Senator Tim Johnson (D-SD) today recognized the efforts of individuals who helped make the Year of Unity a success.  Johnson entered a statement in the Congressional Record highlighting the milestone, and has also cosponsored a resolution to recognize the month of November 2010 as National American Indian and Alaska Native Heritage Month.

 

“I am pleased to honor the individuals who have worked tirelessly to fulfill the vision that was conceived during the Year of Unity.  I am honored to highlight these individuals with a statement in the Congressional Record, and I will continue my work to help improve the quality of life for tribal communities,” Johnson said.

 

South Dakota Governor Mike Rounds declared 2010 the Year of Unity to recognize the progress that has been made in promoting Native American culture since the Year of Reconciliation was established twenty years ago.

 

Full text of the Congressional Record Statement from Johnson below:

Mr. President, in 1990, the late South Dakota Governor George Mickelson, in collaboration with nine tribal leaders, proclaimed a Year of Reconciliation across the state to remember Native Americans and strive for trust, cultural understanding and respect between Native and non-Native people.  This year, South Dakota Governor Mike Rounds declared 2010 as the Year of Unity in order to commemorate the work achieved since the Year of Reconciliation.

I would like to honor Tim Giago, Publisher of Native Sun News, for his vision and dedicated efforts in forming the 2010 Year of Unity Committee and working towards racial unity.  Additionally, I would like to recognize the following individuals: Linda Rabe, Michelle Lintz, Dan Tribby, Gerard Baker, Ron Jeffries, Steve Yellow Hawk, Ira Taken Alive, and Bryan Brewer.  The entire planning committee deserves credit for making the year such a success, as does each individual that attended an event or contributed in any way to the broader effort.  

Many Year of Unity events have occurred in South Dakota, including a Day of Unity at the 2010 Central States Fair.  The 2010 Black Hills Powwow was dedicated to the Year of Unity, and the Lakota Nation Invitational Tournament in December will also be dedicated in this spirit.  Recently, the community of Wagner held a celebration at the Wagner Community School where Governor Rounds and Tim Giago spoke to more than 800 people. 

The Year of Unity was created to encourage racial, cultural and historical education in the state, promote the participation of South Dakotans from diverse backgrounds, and foster dialogue about the struggles and successes of all South Dakotans.  The state of South Dakota, in collaboration with cultural, historical, educational and economic organizations, has taken initiatives to exemplify those goals.  During the Year of Unity, many legislative accomplishments have been made that will improve the daily quality of life for tribal communities. 

During the 111th Congress, we have worked to pass laws that will help improve health and safety on Native American reservations.  The recently enacted Tribal Law and Order Act will strengthen tribal justice systems, protect women from violence and sexual assault, and provide support for at-risk youth.  Through the permanent reauthorization of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act, tribes will now have access to increased medical assistance, facilities, wellness programs and medical job training.

Although these programs are helping to combat the alarming crime rates and health disparities prevalent on reservations, there is still more work to be done.  We must strive to help tribal members stay in their communities by promoting local business and job development.  We must work to improve housing on reservations to ensure adequate safety and shelter.  We must also provide excellent education for children so that they may acquire the knowledge to secure quality employment and restore prosperity to their communities.

Earlier today, I cosponsored a Senate Resolution that was introduced by Senator Byron Dorgan to recognize November as National American Indian and Alaska Native Heritage Month.  I would like to recognize the nine tribes in South Dakota: Cheyenne River Sioux, Crow Creek Sioux, Flandreau Santee Sioux, Lower Brule Sioux, Oglala Sioux, Rosebud Sioux, Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate, Standing Rock Sioux, and Yankton Sioux.  Many tribal members have dedicated their lives to serving their communities and working to find solutions to the challenges Native Americans face every day.  These leaders deserve to be honored for their unwavering commitment to service.

During this time of remembrance, let us celebrate our collaborative accomplishments while recognizing the work that lies ahead.  I have had the honor of working with many friends in Indian Country, and I look forward to working in unison for years to come.
